Deer mice are achingly intelligent.
I've been watching them help to craft molasses into caramel, washing their paws and turning the sticky cooling candies over and over in their paws before they're dropped into molds.
I feel a bond with the beautiful blue one who is a minister to the rest.
I feel lonely watching them considerately climb over one another and sleep close for warmth, say hello with touch.
Though I'm well aware that you could drop a mouse from a different species in their den and they would tear it apart in seconds, I'm touched by their sweetness.
I'm sorry about the kill traps.
I haven't done everything I could.
The lesser deities have been hiding on a rocky beach for several centuries, hoping to remain out of the war, understanding that on either side they would be cannon fodder.
In some sense I am more powerful because my mortality makes me beneath notice.
This moment is a precious opportunity, this brief moment when no one is counting on me to be one way or the other.
I must have taken my phone and thesis out of my pocket to wade through the cold stream.
They must be back there.
You wouldn't have done that, though, my love.
Browen Herzog, you know how to survive.
You are always telling me the beautiful thoughts you had while you were lying on the ice sheets, studying how under rapidly changing conditions the polar bears ceased to be so solitary and learned to form troops, began the first steps toward language.
Your plans for the circuses we would build when we could build culture again, the stage oceans and stage infernos and stage hellscapes of devil hands.
Your hopes of redeeming astrology.
The morality plays you wrote and memorized.
You never try to teach me, you just tell me what your mind's eye sees, and you teach me so much.
Together we begin the hike through the crunching snow from the beginning with our closest friends, looking for the color out of place of my phone case.
We talk about our research and how menstruation feels a little different every time, what it was like to discover our patterns, how sometimes they turned upside down without us noticing and sometimes the tiniest difference was clear as the glint of an icicle.
I'd always thought it was about whether I was allowing myself to be a body as well as a mind.
I'd always thought I could hear my body when I loved it.
But Sasha says they are most attuned to their body when they are hungry for guidance, when their thoughts are tangled and they need a spark of divinity to be inside them, a conscience to listen for.
And this is at least partly true for me - some of the times I've heard my body best were when I was lonely and doubted my body would ever be enough to get the love I want, when I mistrusted its ability to fall in love with the right person, when I ached to know the chord this suspension in my heart would resolve to.
I know my body when I thirst for the knowledge of the body.
I knew Browen loved me when I saw his hunger to map my territory, when I saw I was a wonder of the earth to him, when he asked me who I was and I saw no answer would fully satisfy him.
I knew he loved me when I knew that he would never stop looking for the lost city of gold in me.
My body told me this because I wanted so very much to know.
Most of our friends are medievalists.
Their field is such fertile ground for collaboration for me and I'm so excited to submit the paper we've been working on together.
In recent centuries in the west, ethics has been consumed by foundational questions and only lately with the question of the right thing to do.
But medieval culture is consumed with another question entirely: what characterizes people who do the right thing?
While I am hopeful that character may be more fluid than my ancestors thought, it is less fluid than my contemporaries pretend.
For many reasons, but primarily because we do not change as we wish, or change the conditions as we wish that control how we change, but instead we puppeteer our predilections and dispositions from a great remove, at times cutting against the grain of our very genes.
Perhaps what looks like weakness of will is not a failing we can engineer away, but a consequence of intelligence, like our long infancy.
Perhaps we can expect the same from our machines.
Perhaps intelligence is by definition beyond our total understanding and therefore we must bound the power any intelligence has over any other.
We require our algorithms not merely to be just, but empathetic, curious, slow to anger, filled with loving-kindness, honest, humble, merciful, gentle with themselves and at home in their bodies.
We never find the phone, but the insights from this long winter walk spill out over the years into paper after beautiful paper, relationship after beautiful relationship, eulogy after beautiful eulogy.
I try to only answer direct questions about it.
But the psychologist has asked me very directly about the details of my life with [Brassy] and [1000Plateaus].
I try to be as fair as I can but I can see her features begin to dissolve.
I try to soften what I say even more while still being truthful, but it's no use.
She realizes what is happening and tries to scream, but it's a strangled gurgle; her throat has began to collapse on itself.
As more and more of her becomes the corroding, barely sentient, hungry mass, the transformation accelerates.
The process is distressingly food-like - a collapsing cake, maybe.
Her horrified eyes are the last to go.
It looks like maybe they don't go at all, but are just sucked into the mass, seeing everything the whole time.
If the appointment wasn't over Zoom, I would have been swallowed too.
There are deadly traps for me now everywhere, in the bodies of anyone I might tell.
I don't know who will die if I talk, or how my own death will come for me, but I know it's coming for me eventually, no matter how quiet I try to be.
Jonathan, Gates, Denise, Brent, Patrick: I know you're used to the Royal Shakespeare Theatre Company and all that tea and crumpets shit, but let's, for a moment, dispense with the dulcet tones and the declaiming.
Without your lines, with just your pratfalls and combat training and clowning experience and object work, I want you to build the relationships between your characters.
Who you look toward when you're proud or in danger.
Who you, well beneath the Roddenberrian dictum of harmony, resent.
Up until this season, you have used your body language to project "who you are" but only in the sense of your character's 100-word descriptive capsule.
Bold or competent or curious or generous.
A Cary Grant or a Pinocchio.
But who are you is really who you are with one another.
Who are you with one another?
We will run the mudslide machine and you will continue to fall to your deaths while climbing the mountain until all of us understand exactly who you are with one another and who you might be if something were just a little different.
Engage.
~LeVar
This is how the next battle should go.
Oh, yes, perfect drama.
One Clive with sword and bow against the bullet hell of a regiment.
A boss with a series of tells - some arrows lead, some don't, some are fast, some arcing.
And then unexpectedly before the regiment is felled Clive evolves and a mirror angel attacks.
"This is what it should be," I tell the new engineer when I've finished the performance.
"How can I save it?"
"Oh, you can't."
He goes back to complaining about the font size in core dumps of VW vans.
I so enjoyed my work, though, that it hardly matters that it was lost.
The lesson of the drama was meant for me anyway.
Bobby McFerrin is walking toward my lunch table.
He's singing to himself and I can't help harmonizing, half under my breath like him.
He breaks out in a big grin and my heart soars and I am radiating light, and we both rise to full volume, but we have sung together for twenty minutes before I can make real eye contact.
"I came to your table because it didn't look like you were sitting alone on purpose, and I firmly believe no one should have to eat lunch alone if they do not desire to.
But now I have become suspicious and I want you to tell me the truth: were you sitting alone just to increase the odds that I'd find you and sing with you?"
I don't think that I was, but I can't be sure I wasn't.
A part of me is sure that I was.
It likes that story because then my loneliness has been under my control all along.
"Why don't you try singing all the time, if you want to perform more?"
"It's not always my best work.
There's just so much beauty in the world.
I don't want to cover any of it up with mediocrity."
"When you're on stage, when you've asked people to buy your album, my friend: don't you _dare_ waste their precious attention.
But.
Life.
Is not a performance.
Or if it is, it's _Site-Specific Interactive Theatre_.
Give them the _option_ to see you, at least, darling."
This all sounds nice, but I turn my phone around to show him the records of how often people have been repulsed and nauseated when I've allowed myself to be fully seen, how it's ruined their days.
"That's easy for beautiful people to say, people everyone wants to see.
That isn't me.
I don't want to be the old wrinkly dude in a Speedo that makes everybody lose their lunch."
"Jesus.
Fuck," Bobby McFerrin says, his voice projecting clear through all the din in the cafeteria.
"Why the hell did you stay in these relationships?
Oh, Will.
I'm so sorry."
I hadn't realized until then how unequally distributed disgust of me was among those who'd known me.
Now I'm angry.
"Why does everyone talk as if I had other options?
I stayed because it was the most I could get, the most I'd ever been offered.
And not by a little.
People stay because being loved in a half-assed, unreliable way by an abusive asshole IS ACTUALLY BETTER THAN NOT BEING LOVED AT ALL.
I.
Do.
Not.
Have.
Whatever it is.
That.
You.
Have.
Whatever beauty or grace or status it is that opens the hearts of others, that makes your presence a gift, that makes your suffering permissible to express, that makes your joy contagious, that makes it possible to really really actually all the way love you without an asterisk.
I don't know why, or what it is, but I just don't seem to have it and I just have to deal with that."
"What it is," Bobby says fiercely, "is having.
Been.
Loved.
And you have had that.
Not as much as others might have, blessed with conventional beauty or greater privilege or an easier childhood or luckier breaks, fine, if you want to be petty and measure the infinite, but all you need.
All you need.
All you need.
You couldn't sing the way you sing otherwise.
You wouldn't long for others the way you do otherwise."
He takes my face in his hands.
"Promise me.
PROMISE ME.
You will no longer do the work of your enemies for them."
"Enemies?"
He doesn't mean people.
He means the raw demonic forces of evil who hinder truth and beauty.
With a hungry sword, he cuts out the diamond heart of one whose presence I could only just sense and hands it to me.
It's the same size as my heart, the size of a fist in my cupped hands.
The ichor pools through my fingers but fades into another dimension before it hits the floor.
The diamond is still but it is beating, pulsing cold knowledge.
Bobby McFerrin presses my palms into my chest and my body absorbs the diamond and I tilt my head back and a rainforest grows from my throat and overflows the academy, branches tearing off the ceiling, a cacophony of birdsong and frogs, my body enveloped in brightly colored caterpillars, the glass walls breaking with verdure.
This time Bobby is the one harmonizing with me.
I've been chosen to be the everyqueer in the music video.
I meet-cute the singer and my character is supposed to be bowled over by how hot he is, which is not hard.
Three and a half minutes later it's over, and the vast cast and crew erupts in enormous applause.
Wait - I only get one take?
I hang around for a long time trying to figure out who to ask to straighten this out but everything's being broken down and packed up.
"This is a professional gig," some kind stranger tells me.
"If they wanted two takes out of us they would have paid for two takes."
"But there was this moment where I only just barely avoided spiking the camera..."
"Well, if she didn't want it, she would've cut.
You were hired *for your rough edges*, because you're raw.
The camera crews were in frame on purpose, the whole point is exposing the artifice, that you're in a fake Hollywood world where you don't belong.
She'll use the parts that work.
Which might be exactly the moments you think didn't."
Knowing I'm supposed to look like an amateur doesn't make me feel better!
But I guess I've done everything I can.
I'm collecting my things.
[Mercy] was here, in the dressing room, and a wave of panic hits me, but she seems to be gone now.
She left some of her things behind, and I immediately notice that some of my things are in her things - my first purse and everything inside, my childhood journals, an old favorite outfit.
If I just take them back do I risk being arrested or blacklisted for theft?
I wish I didn't have to go through the lawyers for this.
Now that I'm clear the relationship was unacceptably abusive I'd like to just let it disappear into the past completely.
But I know when I die I'll have to face my past self and explain why I stayed and I don't know, I'm so sorry, I just couldn't imagine being consistently treated with kindness and love, I really didn't even know what it could feel like to receive love, I really thought her anger and disdain were my fault and a corrective gift, I was sure that if we disagreed she must be right, I convinced myself I deserved it, I wanted to hear the truth and was convinced I wasn't hearing the truth until I was told I was unlovable.
I see: I couldn't imagine I'd earned the crowd's applause and I couldn't imagine being free from harm.
I don't endorse "deserve" but here it is, still in operation in my brain.
Our favorite Ferengi, about to be shot and have his brain fried up, makes a dick size joke ("are you still pubertizing, or have you just stopped engaging in homosex?"), whose effects cascade through the society that has taken him hostage, causing adventurous and horny young people to tie themselves to the tops of trees with stolen infants.
Sometimes they drop the infants.
Embarrassingly, they are not all caught.
It's always the responsible people, who catch babies properly, who are most distraught and bear the most trauma.
The world becoming more awful takes more out of you the more giving you are.
"I wish I were catching babies," says Holden, but he's been just standing there staring, thinking about his friend who jumped.
We could have avoided all of this if we'd just built the city correctly to begin with.
We teleported up to the ISS just to steal a washcloth.
It was reckless.
Definitely not my idea.
We were riding high from successfully hiding under the table from the fly-people.
I was the one in danger then, though, and I got through it by doing everything right.
MIT has a whole library of saved powerpoint backgrounds for situations like these, where you have to explain how to live in the 60s or 80s for a while to escape capture.
"Oh, I know all about the 60s, no problem," the one who stole the washcloth says, but in fact she was only there for a weekend, for a destination wedding, pretending to be the royalty of a small island state, and has no idea how to blend in.
People say "This can't be Boston" but in fact it's exactly what Boston looks like.
Not every bridge is the Zakim bridge; not every Au Bon Pain is the one that used to be in Harvard Square.
If you're always looking for reasons why a representation isn't real, you'll find something to convince yourself.
Mom and Dad live out of a long U-Haul, but it's beautiful, full of plants, clean.
Everywhere they stop they take the trees out so they can get some sun.
Jeez, mom, can't you see I'm getting out of the van?
You're always trying to close the sliding door on me.
I know it's not on purpose, but I'M HERE, OKAY!?
I'm really tired, it's the middle of the night, everyone's dying, and I just can't deal with having to keep my head from being cut off.
The same quest about the seasons.
It's riddles about where.
You'll escape on a dolphin's back: be careful with your phone.
The Apple Genius who comes to fix it will look for any sign of criminality.
We didn't renovate the house to hide drugs; it was so that my brother could change his name before he died and not get clipped by the doorframe.
The doorframes are like that because sleepy people in wheelchairs fuck up doorframes.
It's hard to close the bars because for a whole subculture, it's the only way to find another body to be close to.
Observing the patterns was such a good nature show.
The ones there for efficiency at 5pm and paired up by 5:30.
The romantics that always held out until last call for something that might have been better, but always ended up with whatever was left at hand.
The White House basement is smaller than you'd think.
I punch the members of a rival crew unconscious, but I make sure to do it as gently as I can.
I apologize and gently lay their bodies on the floor.
I went to medical school so that I can provide proper care to the people I've hit over the head with 18th-century furniture.
The backyard of this White House is a lot like the last one, only bigger.
For the same price, though, because it's a little further out of town.
More room for the kids to run around in.
The realtor is fishing here, since we haven't said anything about kids, but yes, the nation is expecting, though it doesn't really show yet.
You will know all conditions so that you can speak to all conditions.
[Fez-lawn] is struggling with logistics and I'm afraid of what that means.
It's up to me to identify the contingencies she would have identified.
If I don't, she will notice how her condition is affecting her life and the distress will accelerate her decline.
I need her anxiety and not mine and I dig around inside the basement for it.
It's smaller than you'd think.
I'm almost empty of other selves to try and this one isn't working.
I wish there was someone here to gently, sweetly knock me unconscious and lay me down on the concrete floor, to steal the last of everything and leave me with no choices any more and nothing left to try.
Enduring I can do.
I got rid of the painting I did of Mt.
Rainier.
Just tossed it onto the sidewalk in the rain.
The crater doesn't look like that anymore, and too many people died when it changed.
Seattle is where people went when you might have been able to rekindle a friendship but didn't.
It's where the part of Mom went that never told you she was a basketball star in high school.
You mailed to the Seattle library your plans to visit all the UNESCO World Heritage sites in one exhausting go.
Now everything is under six stories of devil rock, its air pockets trapping terror sounds.
A disposable copy of me asks how I can bear to give up the only remaining link to what I've left behind, and hemorrhages.
A disposable copy of me says there is gain in being truthful about what you've lost, and hemorrhages.
A disposable copy of me says all that matters about our lives is what we change, and change murders realities, and hemorrhages.
A disposable copy of me stares into the distance like it has entered the third stage of acute liver failure, and, when it begins to cry, falls into a fatal coma, unable to vomit the acetaminophen.
I am trying not to act at all, not to murder anything, not to die, not to hold my breath or breathe, not to panic as my vision fills with spots and starbursts, distorting but never occluding the horror of what's in front of me.
Too many people in the house.
It's always changing.
At first it seemed like a continuity error.
Then like a Charlie Kaufman trick.
But now like no one has bothered to care about reality and, neglected, physics has turned angry.
You can't be angry all the time, Maggie Gyllenhaal tells physics, but of course it can, equations are nothing if not a runaway train.
Only a tyrant could be so predictable.
It's disappointing if all this is just a dream of Maggie Gyllenhaal.
In retrospect it really lowers the stakes: all that time we spent rooting for things was wasted.
All the time we spent hoping was wasted.
All the time spent arranging life in a particular order was wasted.
All the time trying to repair a dish that the house wanted broken was wasted.
All of the conversations with bit players who did not return never happened.
Everything you felt when the wrong person was looking you never felt.
Your history is an entertainment that you will forget as soon as the credits roll.
You are a house with no consistency, a nightmare house, unable to yearn yourself into solidity.
Love makes us real, but we are outside the tokamak and lack the mass of a sun.
The energy required to sustain the reaction is unfathomable.
Neptune and Pluto are in the sky together for the last time in our lifetimes in 2020.
When I text my parents this, they come running back inside, begin tearing the houseboat up for the astronomical instruments.
They’ve already died and this is a video game, but I love the way they are in this game more than any other, adorable in exactly the way they actually were.
I’m supposed to be getting more money so I can survive the coming violence but I like to come here and visit and hear the same few lines over and over and prove that their parenting isn’t the cause of my problems.
Being waterboarded in blood.
But I just close my eyes and pretend that it's a panic attack.
I can make it to the next minute.
The fundamental, and maybe only, way to love a child is to be out in the world and notice things together, to delight in noticing and in their noticing, to notice one another, to permit ourselves to notice our interiorities, to seek truth which is the same as seeing.
Tight black suits.
Prone on raft.
Put the cookbook away.
Aim down sights.
Into the past.
The 17th century.
A well-targeted field distortion will generate a story of magic.
A myth we can use today.
A source of semiotic power.
Unpredictable in its consequences.
But what we know is that we need to move.
We don't know where.
We don't need to know.
Something must be changed.
Something has to change.
Sometimes violence is justified simply because it definitely does something.
An Economist article on how things change.
Special offer on Time & Time Again magazines.
Sometimes the thing that looks new was there for a long time.
People were doing it or thinking it for a long time.
And a journalist writes about it and the people think "this journalist is dumb, this is not news."
Or it's in a novel that becomes a motion picture.
And the thing is not new, it was there for a long time, but there are people whose job it is to notice when something will catch fire.
And they are often wrong and nothing catches fire.
But sometimes the fire catches and something changes about everything.
This is tiring and dumb.
No one that makes the thing has a say in where it goes and what it means.
We are helpless to change the world.
And the other side of the coin is: what a relief that no one has that much power.
We've been burying all the awfulness from the internet and we're running out of virtual landfill.
We put awfulness magnets in the ground around the dump sites so that over time the evil will be scrambled, rendered inert.
But the bits are still there waiting to be reassembled.
We dance on the information grave but death doesn't care if we dance.
We strive for goodness and order but evil is entropy, a universal law, water finding any crack.
The Romulan warrior nuns have no shortage of work, because every cause is a lost cause.
Oh, I was supposed to remove the hardships from the deck between rounds.
There's nothing wrong with me, I'm not cursed, I'm not doing something wrong that everyone else is doing right - I just misunderstood the rules.
I can't describe the relief.
I wish I'd known before civilization was destroyed but now anything feels possible even with the ash still raining from the sky.
I'd thought a 427.03 list was isomorphic to a 529 Environment list, but nooooooo.
Doubly linked lists are much more straightforward to traverse in the former regime.
Thank god there's a bug in the program; I was beginning to doubt there was an answer to the question of who I am.
Place the stone in the right place in the stream and the water below it will be pure.
Place another stone downstream.
Then a third.
Attention to detail recovers all the ancient wisdom, piece by piece.
No knowledge that comes from the world, from the ways of things, can be wholly lost.
There's no point in practicing with a blunt arrow.
It doesn't fly the way a sharp one does.
Practice only on what you are prepared to pierce.
Otherwise you are practicing bluntness, holding back, empty action.
The moment before the tutorial begins, when you are free to act for a moment, recover that feeling.
It feels so good to see a map of tasks spread before you, occupying your hours and curing you of the pain of saying no.
But this is someone else's quest log, a plan for stones that doesn't care about the water, a plan for the flight of arrows that doesn't care about a target, a customer service script for a breakup.
Can you tear yourself from instruction to be led instead by the work?
There is nothing interesting at the electronic entertainment expo.
Maybe Humanity Unlimited, a battle-royale-sized strategy game that's really different every time, constantly changing with the addition and subtraction of dragons and superheroes, grieving and music subsystems.
A battle royale with multiple ways to win is interesting by itself.
The other games that look vaguely promising aren't out for years and years.
My boss and I are discussing the evolution of OKCupid because it's relevant to multiplayer free-to-play features and brand identity.
I'm a little worried we'll land on my profile and it'll be awkward.
Why do I have that thing?
OKC is an arid wasteland, I have no good and recent pictures.
And besides, there's a set rate at which I'll meet people interested in me - one every 6-24 months - and there's nothing I can do to change it.
I'm realizing that if I genuinely believed I could impact the real world I wouldn't play games any more.
The thing they give me is a temporary, weak, non-transferable sense of self-efficacy.
How can I learn to see into the systems of the world as clearly as I see the designs of games?
The systems of myself and others?
Of academic and career advancement?
Of time ticking away and vanishing?
Of finding and sustaining love?
Of transforming the world?
Of managing my anxiety?
Once a student, always a student at the St.
Clotilde Catholic School for Unfairly Treated, Incorrigible, and Alienated Youth.
This is all a flashback; I'm explaining to [Beach] and other friends how I returned.
[Beach] had been asking for advice about whether to join an ensemble that would mean living in a van with four other people, a cocker spaniel, and two trash compactors.
My first memory there is being little and pretending to have the power to jump from one electronic device to another.
I would dive at the television set, slide underneath it, and crawl behind the furniture to the ancient furniture-sized radio in the other room.
I liked imagining I was pure electricity, only a signal, with no memories or hopes.
[Doctor Lily Shoes] loved this game too and that's how we became fast friends.
I was smaller than her and could squeeze between more devices, but she studied information theory so that she could spin beautiful stories of what was happening to us.
She loved the feeling of control she got from me acting out her words, and I loved that for a minute I wasn't trying desperately to fill the void of the day with meanings, to build a world from nothing.
The rooms are filled with books, but every room the same books: the ones I remember most clearly are the Redwall series, Consider Phlebas, the Book of Trash Saints, and a series of books that look like self-help books but are about changing the dysfunctions of enormous systems so much bigger than you.
I later learn that this is to create a local pop culture among the students.
We're always moving from dorm room to dorm room and god I hate how dirty it always is when I first move in.
I feel like I want to throw up until I've fixed it.
I can't fall asleep until it's done.
Sometimes I'm so sleep-deprived and sob and sob for no reason as I drag my body through the day.
I try to keep it secret but sometimes I'm found out and get to sleep in the nurse's office where everything is always so beautiful.
But even then I can feel on my skin that the job isn't done.
In second grade you are given a quest paper that will take the rest of your school years to complete.
It's a closely guarded secret that when you graduate from high school your project is fed into a shredder and you are told that the real project is the woman you've become.
Everything else can be taken away from you, and will be, but that can't and won't.
But I was hiding behind the shredder, about to pretend to come out of it, and found out the secret from the start.
I write nothing for ten years and all of my projects are orally transmitted strange art.
When absolutely forced to document, I tattoo my body.
[Doctor Lily Shoes] and I think that we are difficult, and delight in that image, with our book groups where we read different books out loud at once and only speaking in Hungarian during Spanish class and holding Science Masses at the same time as regular Mass.
It becomes clear as we grow older that the school is full of reformers who adore us and are rooting for us.
I begin to ham it up, improvising bits with the teachers about my non-Britishness that illustrate the lesson of the day, and they pretend to quit while I teach a concept for ten minutes.
I'm a damn good classroom teacher with charisma the size of a house.
When I see [Doctor Lily Shoes] again, we're both starting over from nothing, our heroic successes somehow eaten by the shredder of circumstance.
She is hard to console, but I know she has succeeded at the real project.
She thinks I have too, but I show her that my tattoos have vanished, like everything I've made, and I still feel like I am reconstructing myself from out of the radio waves each morning.
Drunkenly kissing her was probably a mistake.
We're both pretending it maybe didn't really happen, but she is trying to impress me all the time by complaining about everything.
I don't know why this is a strategy people use.
Is she trying to advertise how clever she is?
The put-downs aren't that clever.
You, senator, are no Dorothy Parker.
By making the world look worse, does she think she will look more appealing?
Does she feel the unfair burdens the garbage world puts upon her excuses her carelessness, toward herself and others?
Sometimes I think I get stuck pining for straight girls because they're the only ones who'll let themselves just be happy for a moment.
She's complaining about how the Pride walk isn't queer enough.
Despite it being all queer people.
This is too much and I ask "Are we queer enough?"
and immediately regret we-ing us.
Hope and defensiveness shut her up for a moment, and I have a powerful urge to be in control of the situation, to dominate and maybe, just a little, to destroy.
"Let's queer it up then.
I'll walk if you walk."
And the sexualization of dares works on her.
I dot my face with marker stubble and pull on a hoodie that hides my shape and my hair.
I put on my butchest thick black winter gloves and boys' galoshes.
I stride to the starting line the way I imagine I would if I were six feet tall and headed for Wall Street.
The MC asks my name and I tell her my real name and she gives me a do-over with her eyebrows.
"Oh.
Desiree," I say, so sultry you can see the accent mark.
This would be my cam girl name if I hadn't decided I wanted to preserve the option of running for office some day.
And when I think of turning on a manufactured sexiness I think of drag.
Is that fucked up?
The MC looks me up and down and seems to read my mind and shakes her head, but only with her perfectly penciled eyebrows, not accepting my answer.
Looking into my soul, she says, with a question mark but not a question, a greeting: "Mem?"
And like a long dormant part of me was plugged into a wall socket, my drag king self inhabits me.
"Meme.
Meme.
Chose.
Chose."
comes out of my mouth, and a perfect vogue from my limbs.
"Comment ca va, off with your clothes."
pointing a gloved hand as if it had the power to grant instant orgasms.
I'm ready.
I stride out and turn toward the crowd and pull on the fingers of my glove as if I will remove it and whoops go up and I.
Own.
Everyone.
In.
This.
Room.
After Ragnarok, after the end of everything, basically no one is satisfied.
Only the Old Ones and their daughter Entropy.
Lon, last of the seven Nordic brothers of legend whose names end in -on, strikes a deal with all the rest of evil that needs something to exist.
His sisterwitch Fione rides the narrative strands upstory.
And often nothing changes, the castle tower still collapses because of the brothers' slightly different foolish error, the last war still breaks out.
But, finally, tugging on all of the possibilities ties the universe tighter and tighter, until it's a very short play or a McSweeney's article, and can live neatly inside another reality.
When the comics industry collapses, the story skates to suspension, but never, truly, definitively ends.
Is this pain something you and I did to each other?
Or is it what the vacuum of space does to all of us?
How much safer can I really expect to be from anyone?
Is my trouble that I am endangered, or that I am vulnerable to danger?
Is your trouble that you are wronged, or that you become violent when wronged?
I am living, but at the same time, constantly calculating.
If I can understand the distance between one experience and another, I can understand how to be free to act.
This calculation is a fine way to occupy my thoughts in the times when it seems as if I cannot act, when there is no first person and there is just the first Critical Mass ride since the apocalypse, when I am someone else, repairing the ancient heating system, or when I am running from a raptor, in order to illustrate that you cannot successfully run from a raptor.
No one tells you how much the brave ones had to hide.
We focus on the bravery in the face of danger, but those who stepped out the most took constant precautions proportional to their risk.
They gave up an easy life along with, in some cases, their life itself.
Bravery is not invulnerability, or fearlessness.
The ferris wheel doesn't run often.
Sometimes, the guy says, I just show it.
Oh, the year with the boathouse cabin.
When I had to send a whole group of kids home for drugs.
That feeling where you feel like a failure when the kids let you down, that particular shade of anger when you're in a situation that prevents you from really helping them.
You might not be the best at the ukelele, but you might still be best at giving ukelele lessons.
And you think you might do some good in their life if you could just keep giving them those lessons.
But you can't because they'll hurt other kids.
Eeerrrrrrrrggggggghhhhhh, WHY am I being TESTED on the @!#!$% COLORS of all the queer FLAGS!?!?
I am tired of signaling costs, currencies of belonging.
Doing the right thing will not win love; group approval is based on subconscious criteria that do not align with moral behavior.
Just as choosing the hard thing instead of the easy thing is a rough heuristic for right action, so is being the right kind of asshole, defiant.
Being the right kind of asshole has complex effects on group membership - it can be both repulsive and attractive.
My mistake with [Brassy] was that I expected that the signal was just a signal.
An elephant never forgets Superbowl XXXII.
And neither will you when you purchase these large plush elephants in the team colors that you saw the players you love pick up off of the field and hug when the game ended.
The announcers are always talking as if there's something to be won and lost beyond the game itself.
As if you could somehow not get the gold and still count a victory.
I don't understand this.
It seems like another way that people are always lying, like the things people say and then they say "it's just an expression' when you tell them it's not true.
This is why I don't say I like sports, I say I like sports facts, because that is the real truth.
I'm smart, polite, and practical-minded.
And people say I'm funny and they do laugh sometimes but when they say it, the mechanics of how they say it are similar to how they say things other times they're lying.
I'm the ideal person to help sort out the possessions from large and complex estates, because I'm smart, polite, and practical-minded.
The parties are embroiled in their emotions and, more so, in the emotions they're trying to project to one another and the emotions they're trying to dodge that others are firing at them like a hail of arrows.
They are magnetized to destructive behaviors that help them not feel their emotions or others' for a moment.
I don't need cigarettes or alcohol or World of Warcraft, though, because I'm not vulnerable in the same way.
[Red] is so sad all the time, even when the estate isn't her mother's, and sometimes it's like I don't have a boss.
It was a mistake to carry my CD collection to all of our jobs, though.
I've cracked some.
I don't really listen to music but it reminds me of my time at music school when I counted the people coming and going.
The people were so beautiful and the numbers I counted so wonderfully accurate.
I wish they had been more interested in my counting.
Sometimes I think maybe I should have been better at counting, but I keep playing it back in my head and I counted everything perfectly.
[Dreamboat] is trying to get me to play World of Warcraft again.
The new expansion has a much too long story and people say it's bad but I can't judge.
I don't like pretty much any fiction; it's just another way that people like to lie to each other.
But there's also some powder you throw in the fire at a particular point in the story and that's something I want.
I want to be allowed to open the packet.
I'm not sure why anyone would go anywhere in particular in this vast virtual world, though.
I chase after [Dreamboat] and we keep killing people and I don't know why and I'm not sure this is a nice game.
I look at my actions on the screen and, just like when I look at someone else in real life, I find it hard to tell if I'm a bully or a friend.
I'm not sure I'm nice and maybe that's why most people don't like me and I begin to cry and scream and bang my head against the keyboard and I guess there are ways I try not to feel things too.
My favorite way to mess with people is to pretend I've seen the TV show they're talking about and get excited about characters and episodes that I make up on the spot and see what happens.
It's informative how people react to a bald-faced, demonstrable lie, from amusement to violent indignation.
It helpfully narrows down the pool of possible friends for sure.
It's also how I landed a writing gig on Battlestar Galactica and The Cosby Show.
Do you think that turning someone into a character in your role-playing campaign is ethical?
It's of course about power, it follows the rules for parody.
The infant in her bundle is so, so small.
Wrapped so tightly it doesn't even look like a larva.
He's trying to remain calm but could fall apart at any moment.
He's describing to me what happened to her in the heat, exactly how her vital systems fail, the colors an infant's body turns, the distress she felt.
"My baby!
Oh, I can't bear to look."
I can, and I unwrap the infant - she's in a little distress because the bundle covered her nose and mouth and was so tight.
But she's alive and will be fine, and I re-bundle her in a more sensible way.
I know that this is a dream, and if I had allowed myself to believe I'd find something horrible, that would have killed her; I would have killed her.
So the most important thing to do was to ensure it was my dream and not his by being the one to unwrap the infant.
I'm flying through a stack of books in the donation pile, deciding that me and my sister have no attachment to them, tearing off their covers and recycling them.
"Um, we were going to donate those?
But that's okay I guess," my mother interrupts, meaning that it isn't okay.
I don't think the library needs another ratty copy of Dragonlance, but I was prepared for this possibility, and the covers are sorted so that gluing them on is a trivial task.
I'm so excited that this big-deal church has asked me to write a cantata for them.
I've got lots of good ideas, large segments of promising sketches.
I'm chatting with the minister and I find out she expects to perform today - I'd had next year on my calendar.
I tell her so and she looks disappointed and angry and a group of churchgoers reach for their weapons.
"I'll just teach everyone the parts by ear; it'll take a lot longer than just listening, but it'll be much more powerful" I say - knowing that this way we'll only get through the first song and I'll have plenty of time to compose ahead.
Plus it really will be more powerful if everyone sings it themselves.
In the game of life you have to both catch your dreams in the form of falling stars, and catch the points that you get as a result.
If you only do a certain kind of work, and not the collection work, you don't see the benefits.
And if you only do the collection work, the amount to collect is paltry and the work is frustrating.
If you let your endlessly compounding returns compound endlessly, you never extract any returns: this is the real-life St.
Petersburg Paradox.
Eventually after all your heroism in your dreams tonight, if you keep having dreams like this, people will trust you.
They will relax in your presence knowing that you are competent and capable.
The trick you haven't understood before here is: others will relax knowing that you are competent and capable, but not you.
Your trustworthiness derives from the fact that you are not relaxed, and you know that you are fallible and only finished work is trustworthy.
Trusting yourself does not look like trusting others; the journey to competence doesn't have to take you all the way to narcissism.
But eventually you will fall in love with the feeling of needing to re-prove yourself.
You can't always interpret anxiety as excitement - but in some of the times when you can't, you can interpret it as a passionate desire for the world to be a certain way.
Desire is the cause of paralysis and its cure.
In those moments where you hesitate, you are calculating whether you are allowed to want what you want, whether you really want what you thought you wanted, and whether you want to want what you want.
When you were younger and people told you you just needed to get laid, this is pretty much what they meant - your everything hangups are like other people's sexual hangups, the ones they can really only get over by fucking more.
The group starts to fall apart on the last day even before the expected betrayal.
Three person-sized take-out containers, and a small bag, are delivered, more than I expected.
I'd been preparing to steal enough gas mask tokens to get far away into the mist - your "allies" are often the greatest danger.
But now I'm worried about the packages - it could just be a giant bomb in there.
Or a witchbomb, or a culture bomb, or a sanity bomb.
When we share stories about how we got through similar tense situations, [Limber] tells the story about how he happened to bed the artist who he'd assumed was lesbian instead of offering any useful wisdom.
He thinks he was charming; I think she was just scared and clinging to any available distraction.
The centaur stretches her impossibly long legs into what looks like an extremely uncomfortable position in order to sleep alongside the horses on the truck that carries them and her giant mirror.
"It's simple, just like this," she explains in great detail, even though none of our bodies work anything at all like hers.
Now I wish I had never gotten attached to any of these people in the first place.
The people you know are the ones most likely to murder you, and someone's probably getting murdered before sundown.
There are various forms of castration available if you want to really give up on sex, but what option is there if you want to cut out the yearning for friendship and approval?
How do you break up, shape up, and trade up (as my best-selling relationship advice book and seminar says) with every garbage human in your social circle?
Follow the money to understand the cult.
Though I understand them pretty well already, being less rational, being sympathetic to the forces that drive people to drastic measures to belong.
Not all of the art is authentic.
Don't talk about the mob so loud where everyone can hear.
If I make your weapon invisible and teleport it to the closet, is that how you should first appear in this puzzle?
Invisible objects that retain their collision are certainly inelegant since you could find the bounding box by trial and error.
Better to put them so far away they could never be interacted with.
My workplace, suddenly and belatedly concerned with fairness, is wrapped up trying to discount our products to people without air conditioning or who bought a lot of aspirin.
No one can tell me why these are the proxies for disadvantage we've settled on.
This is the problem with having lots of data - you still can't measure the thing you're really interested in, but you get an endless number of stupid targets to chase.
The teacher we loved for his pessimism has chosen a seat alone several tables away, where he can face us and glare.
I'd thought his darkness was a bit of an act, but I'm looking at his home movies and he never puts it away.
Being a good social studies teacher means that you can never forget that people are dying at this exact moment for the absolute dumbest of reasons.
You can never forget racism, but you can't forget the rest of evil either, the way so many people do when they're angry, and you need a different kind of anger.
While I knew many people who died afterward, I remember when I held for a moment a folded flag that had been draped over a coffin.
That first remote experience of death seared into me its seriousness and no other loss took as much of a toll as that soldier I had never met.
There: see the real sky beneath the fake sky?
The real real sky is behind that.
When things go wrong enough and they think you're distracted they'll open it up for maintenance and you can see.
Hey, [Guggenheim], you're in a house too, aren't you?
What's yours like?
Let's compare notes and see if we can find out what it means.
I know you want a certain loneliness, but don't worry, we can preserve it.
There are types of experience you can repeat exactly the same way and so map them for others and types of experience that are too highly non-deterministic to map.
Life isn't all the time; life is only contained in the latter.
Awareness of the present moment is just a tool for leaping into the second category by breaking the fourth wall.
Eventually everyone discovers the prison of the hands, though not everyone seems to want to escape, despite the fact that the related emotions are generated from illusory circumstances.
Knowing it's not real, apparently, doesn't make it any less real to us.
I'm always dropping clues for kids.
Literally - I have a little slingshot where you prick the knowledge and fire it across the room for someone to find later.
If you don't know where something is, it can't be taken from you in the same way.
When the castle falls from the sky, the inhabitants will tell you pleasant things you don't need to hear, but somewhere in there is the power you need.
With our community's great power, creation is magically fast, but massive and sudden destruction is a regular event.
We are always asking each other to take care of our loved ones in the event of just in case.
We fly over the countryside to the least interesting town, where our enemies rehearse the contagion of giving up, of not taking one's moments seriously enough.
I'm gradually learning to read my every action like a bird - first its pattern of flight, then its manner of death, then the patterns of the entrails, then the results of throwing the bones as dice.
The categorical imperative is a kind of dry witchcraft, asking if: what if like creates like?
We set up a stage and fill the night with skits, with every type of performance at hand, intensifying our experience as a ward against the explosion of emptiness to come.
[woke up screaming] I don't understand why you're showing her this.
[Fez-lawn] is radiant and you're so happy to see her in person.
Her dress is the perfect choice for the occasion, a sleeveless geometric print, projecting effortlessness, playfulness, and elegance in ideal proportion.
None of us understand why you brought her here, to your childhood home after you've been living in it alone pretending to be your father for six months.
Receipts and hairballs clog the floor and the refrigerator may not have been cleaned since the 70s.
It seems like you want us to relieve you of the duty of piloting this body.
(The inner circle of observing passengers brightens at the prospect and begins to joke with each other, even as the oversight panel remains stern.)
Unimaginable resources have been invested in you to give you this opportunity.
Training that stretches back to your very first birth.
You have been unimaginably lucky and you want to just throw it all away and return to the infinite darkness?
You've been trained better than that.
Pull it together, pilot.
It's late for the reservation because you're always late, aren't you?
You've opened the car door and are about to step in when your dad says "Everyone good to go?"
and [Fez-lawn] says "Hit it!"
You run alongside the car as it begins to pick up speed, gripping the frame as tightly as you can, and shout to your dad to slow down, but it's not clear he heard.
He should be able to hear from here.
Are they ignoring you on purpose?
Is this a test, or another lesson in determination?
Is this the only way to be molded into someone more capable?
Your strides are frighteningly long as the car picks up speed and you fight to avoid being dragged.
The open door hits a parked car and swings shut on your wrists.
You begin to lose feeling in your hands and are not sure whether you will slide loose and tumble onto the busy roadway or be dragged alongside the car the whole way, your legs ultimately ground away by friction.
You devote more and more effort to shouting for help but the faster the car goes the more noise the wind makes, and the longer this goes on, the weaker your voice is, until you pass out from the exertion of whispering "please".
[1000Plateaus] wishes the game did a better job of teaching you how to throw a punch.
I have the game he's hoping for but it's real and people drive to kill you, playfully throw your car into the air, barrel into your living room with an eighteen-wheeler because it's funny.
[Brassy] and [1000Plateaus] are moving out and I have to go back to [the nightmare co-op].
There are holes in the walls that the wind blows through and the paint falls into my food and it smells.
No matter where I go assholes are yelling at me - you'd think I'd be used to it.
Maybe I am used to it and that's the problem.
If the lives of cetaceans really mattered the way you say they do, you'd be living differently.
Flying through the gym, hardly eating but for some very deep breaths, as beautiful and transparent as a cnidarian.
The neighbor won't let us launch thousands of feet in the air from her backyard anymore.
Apparently we didn't pay her back for the insurance?
I'm sure I gave you the money to do that, what the hell?
Let me just find the tab to check on that money and send her what we haven't - holy jesus, who's been looking at porn on my computer?
I just keep closing tabs and closing tabs and closing tabs and now anger and a vague resentful horniness are amplifying each other.
I'm supposed to be in a meeting coordinating this assault on the sniper nest and I'm still closing tabs and can't even use my machine.
I have to give a presentation on why our district makes the best bread because of our propensity for magic and I have to wing half of it because I don't hear that the demo bread is delayed.
I keep thinking that I could fix this with a quick visit to a website but every time I open up the computer there's more stupid popups to close.
Eventually part of me just wants to give up on the war and the bread contract and my family obligations and just enjoy the illusion of being wanted by people who are hot enough to have very high standards for who they want.
I keep moving forward as best as I can with my projects, but I discover myself making mental notes of hot images as I close tabs.
Maybe I could learn something that would improve my blowjob technique if I studied this one.
Maybe I should be saving for sex lessons with an escort.
Or researching sexual hypnosis.
Maybe I should be dating more.
Maybe I should be sleeping with everyone I can regardless of how into them I am, just for the practice.
That swagger I have when I've just made someone scream with ecstasy, maybe if I had it all the time, things would work out.
Maybe access to sex changes one's hormonal makeup to facilitate goal-directed behavior.
Was I the one who was supposed to pay the insurance?
Was I as clear with the bread supplier as I thought?
Did I put these stupid tabs here myself?
Why would I do that to myself?
Why would I want to fail?
Were my doubters right about me all along?
Let's review the spreadsheet of our possible futures.
You've been much too careful to leave the good ones for everyone else.
Why?
WHY?
WHY?
I'm frightened of [Mercy] and [Brassy].
I can see their icons in the top right.
They're not dim.
They're watching what I choose.
They're going to hurt me or kill me if I ask for something I'm incapable of getting, haven't earned, don't - in their eyes - deserve.
Line after line is being deleted.
Is that them, or is that time?
Or am I doing that in another tab, a secret to myself?
The chip sits at the first layer of your senses.
The trouble with your mental health is that your senses are attenuated to match a self-understanding.
Conflicting information and impulses are discarded.
Over time, this hardens your self-image into something so much smaller and weaker than your possibility.
The chip we've installed cancels your ignoring and restores the signals from your senses to their incoming strength, sending the truth on to the rest of you.
And action becomes possible again.
Your opinion of yourself is no longer more important than reality.
Your illusion of a continuous self no longer binds you to repeat your past mistakes.
It is, it turns out, possible to fix yourself.
You have dreams so you can check them off the list.
Congratulations; this is the one about your best friend's wedding and the dress that doesn't fit the way it seemed to when you tried it on before.
Your great behind-the-scenes comfort in the face of stress and confusion make you just right for covering the music celebrity charity track, We Are the World for a new generation.
Its seedy underbelly is unfortunately not that surprising or interesting a story.
Addictions are accommodated instead of treated.
Broiling anger allowed to burn.
And the terms of the arrangement mean that the musicians who really care don't have real opportunity to co-create.
You keep trying to dream about modularase, but it's not on the list.
You don't know enough about the cell's nuclear machinery and you never will.
Death is coming.
You will die before [Fez-lawn] and [Mighty] and you don't get to see their extra list entries, you won't get to wake up beside them and ask "do you remember your dreams?"
There are only so many dreams on your list.
You can't just wish yourself into immortality and omnipotence.
Or even semi-relevance and utility.
You win when you do the work.
You have to make it through the teaching year to get to the musicians' reunion.
There's some exciting ML thing happening here too, it's so hard to know what to go to.
[10P] and [DapperCellist] are here from Eastman!
You haven't thought of them in so long.
It's hard to know what to say.
They seem happy to see you - though more like they're proud to have remembered you than like you're a long-lost friend - but there's a crashing wave of fear coming for you - you'll have to explain what happened to you and you don't actually know the answer.
I am just supposed to be investigating the helicopter accidents, but digging as deeply as I have into training and operating procedures happens to have brought me to the base where an attack on Beijing will be launched.
The general is caught off-guard when I bring it up in the interview - he shuts down the questions about the strategy, but begins to weep for all of the bloodshed, the never-ending violence, how so few men are obligated to host all of the world's demons.
He says the military is the only field where moral philosophy is consistently and seriously engaged, because you can't hide from the costs of your actions.
Business and sports draw on the military's work on how to win, but not on why you must.
I say, but what good is it to engage morality when you take on an obligation to follow orders regardless of their wisdom - doesn't that commit one to evil?
He shows me crystallized time, and just how little I've done in mine.
He says, we have such limited capacity to order ourselves but such a gift for bringing order to one another.
Only the trained mind can act consistently, and training requires that someone else has a use for you.
Who will train me to align my actions with what's right, then?
I ask.
You refuse to be trained, he answers.
Have refused, are refusing, and will refuse.
You will never give over your moral agency - you've willingly taken on this curse.
You have been training yourself, but half-heartedly, as if you thought at some point the world would step in and help.
Because usually the world helps!
I exclaim in frustration.
No, he says, and places Berkson's Paradox into my palm.
The only reason you know so many well-loved people is that you've selected your sample by those you admire for their capacity for love.
The world is mostly hell, goodness more often rebellion than obedience.
I begin to frantically scour the helicopter manuals for clues of where to start my training, but they are vaporized when the general explodes into a bird of fire and ash and takes flight to burn the helpless and unlucky alive.
A short remark at my dad.
It wasn't really about him; I was just wrapped up in this article in the MIT Tech Review about my ML research and how it connects to the video game industry and for some reason they'd interviewed [BanachTarskiBanachTarski] instead of me, and my name wasn't mentioned at all - it's cool to see her in print but I'm annoyed that she didn't point the reporter to me.
Once you move back home to take care of your aging parents everyone forgets about you real fast.
And my dad's quip exactly pierced that tender spot of feeling like a failure, the grand mystery of why I am unobservable.
As soon as I finish the article I realize that maybe his joke was an awkward attempt to connect and I'd reinforced our distance by rejecting him.
I look up from the magazine hoping to ask him if he's free to hang out tonight - anticipating that his response will be confusion about what we would even do - but he's vanished.
I search the house but he's nowhere, his keys and coat still here and the door never opened.
"I'm not too worried.
It happens sometimes; he'll re-apparate.
Or maybe not and it's really okay either way, it's his call," says my mom.
It's possible he's gone back to the navy, which is all about murdering one's shipmates even under total surveillance and hacking the server to give yourself a new identity before you're caught.
Or waiting around until the day you have to do that.
I've projected the past all around us to see if my childhood was really that lonely.
It is so much worse than I remember, not just loneliness but constant active cruelty.
The lives of the kids around you are out of control and they torture you in order to have some kind of agency.
They taught you to hate your own body, sexuality, speech, thinking.
Their attacks were specific, sexual, coordinated, all of a child's creativity and imagination and willingness to experiment applied to hurt you worse than yesterday.
You tried to become invisible to survive.
Any movement was dangerous.
There were adults who felt sorry for you, mostly strangers, but they tried to give you strength by telling you how smart and talented you were, how that would let you escape, through some means they could not describe, into some other life that you did not have the capacity to imagine.
[Fez-lawn] is telling eight-year-old you, who is staring into space, hoping for oblivion, "You're so smart.
And so good at board games.
It's like you see underneath them."
and she's trying to protect you instead of break up with you but doesn't know how.
Everyone failed to tell you in a way you could understand that what was happening to you was wrong, that the things your attackers said about you were wrong.
You learned to hold complexity in your mind by fully believing both your protectors and your enemies.
It was shocking in adulthood to learn how little people know about one another, and how much they lie when they insult each other, because you had worked so hard to believe everyone.
You thought your attackers used the same attention to other and to the truth that you did.
Your parents wanted you to be happy, which meant to stop being sad.
You couldn't tell anyone what was wrong because you didn't know for sure that anything was wrong, that it wasn't your fault.
You came to believe your talents were a lie, because you never escaped into some other world.
You distrusted those who wanted to protect you because the safety they promised didn't come.
And you came only to believe your attackers.
And when you left town and their judgment vanished you sought out relationships, hobbies, careers where you could play out that rejection over and over, magnify it, validate it.
If they were right about you, then the world was not so senseless and cruel to you.
You've thought you sought out rejection so that you could identify what was wrong with you and fix it, but it's also true that you've sought it out because, if you are broken, that retroactively fixes what was wrong with the world.
Ever since you realized you could take more pain than others, you've been trying to take as much of it into yourself as you can.
This reality spins above you like an immune system in the air.
Your inner eye has become a scanning electron microscope and you can see the atomic structure of the part of reality that you are responsible for.
What do you do with this magnetism towards failure, this evil you were involuntarily impregnated with that you give birth to over and over?
The spell cast on you became true and now there genuinely is something fundamentally wrong in you, and now you are casting the spell that holds the wrongness in place.
Can the spell be eroticized and owned and transmuted, can any magic be done to your cruel and evil heart?
Can you love your love of failure and redeem it?
Robin Williams tells you that it's not your fault.
But your childhood was long ago, and what it means now is not your fault, but it is your responsibility.
Eight-year-old you is staring into space, hoping for oblivion - will you give it to them?
You make his eyes light up again, in a way they haven't since his husband died.
He knows that you're too young to fall in love with, but you're not too young to care about and for.
The heart needs arteries to beat.
Someplace for the blood to go.
Even an open vein will serve as a purpose if there are no cells worth keeping alive.
But you are not a wound.
You are not a wound.
You complete a circulatory system.
Wherever you go you are part of one.
You can slip between the gap in the rock, go beyond the wall, in a way you won't be able to when you grow.
You are thin enough to draw the bowstring back from the crack in the cliff, to fire arrows at the dragon where you can't be seen.
It can't be killed.
That's not the point.
The point is to be noticed, which begins the life of purpose.
You want him to be noticed, he wants to be, but it's impossible to adventure on another's behalf.
You can turn over all the spoils and tell all the tales, but moral agency is non-transferable.
You can't make someone someone.
And there really are things which are too late.
His husband will always be dead, the new dog will never know their marriage, he will never again be an infant whose every aspect inspires care from those around him, no day that has passed returns.
I just finished the text for _Origins of Bicoherence_.
I've taught my team how to deliver the associated lectures, and all the slides are wrapped.
The rough idea of bicoherence is that you can think of it as correlation but for arbitrary functional forms, not just linearity.
It simplifies Navier-Stokes (but doesn't solve it - at least I haven't, though I suspect that Sara might with a little more time) and offers a clearer (in my opinion) derivation of the wave equation.
Really fun to work on a book that has examples on everything from speech to gravity.
Most importantly I think it can replace the things we're leaning on frequentism for, and plug the serious holes in scientific statistics that arise from having access to vastly larger datasets and running vastly more experiments - bicoherence tests are basically un-p-hackable and don't assume every relationship is linear.
A waveform can characterize dynamic systems, like most of reality, much better than the gradient that arises from regression.
I'd planned to do Thanksgiving on Friday, but no one else is available then, and looking at my calendar, now that the book and course is complete, it's entirely empty.
Guess I just have to cross my fingers and wait for the lecture invitations to come in?
I love my team but you can't be real friends with your boss.
[Aplanacanal] is walking everyone through the art they should have made this year, in his insufferable lecturing drone.
I kept up better than I thought, given the false accusations and the subsequent harassment, the physical attacks in the middle of the night and the cold water in the middle of winter.
My friends expected me to care about what movies we watched or what books we kept, but I had no time for anything that wasn't directly related to staying alive.
In some ways it was easier to have an explanation for the distance of others, a reason for it that I knew wasn't true.
Cruelty rather than invisibility was easier to bear, death and rape threats preferable to the silent threat of an empty life.
There was a good reason why I wasn't graduating, why it was sometimes hard to face the day, why I broke down from time to time.
The pain of the frostbite from when I was drenched in a bucket of water in the middle of a winter camping trip helps me focus, keeps me from staring into space for too long.
The last film ever made was a work of art made in Mr.
Washington's class.
Basically the whole school takes part in making these, and the inventiveness in every detail is off the charts.
We didn't think from the script it would have anything to do with birthdays, but then the opening theme music was a remix of Happy Birthday and the script team decided they had to do something with that.
It's awkward all living together at the end of the world.
This kid is trying so hard - the clothes for each day's outfit is folded together - but you can still immediately tell that they don't know what they're doing.
Rules for sleeping so we don't wake each other up too much.
I keep accidentally turning on the wash function in the walk-in freezer.
I'm building the camera path to show off construction - what I've got is really exciting if a little motion-sickness-inducing.
It's a good thing to be doing in the D&D downtime.
Got people I can get feedback from, something else to concentrate on so that the fine detail work is bearable without too much loneliness.
Inspiration is so funny - it's funny how you can just say a thing, say it in the right way, and it's like a magic spell on another person.
Usually in games you do a thing and it unlocks more abilities, but here someone else almost always unlocks your abilities, just by saying the right thing.
A 4% chance of wild birds in 100 years.
Not counting those domesticated or partially domesticated, dependent on acts of city-dwellers (like pigeons).
"4%?"
says the ornithologist.
Yes.
A 10% chance of wild mammals.
(There is more room in the sea away from us.)
"No birds?"
says the ornithologist.
Well, some of our devices are likely to enwild; some will probably even speciate.
They may evolve quite quickly.
Some are likely to fly and approximate the size and body plan of birds.
"But no birds," says the ornithologist.
A 4% chance of wild birds.
With total genomic control and the ability to detect, record, and project protein synthesis, we will artificially be able to grow any organism with 30% probability in 100 years, and 75% probability in 500, even those that have already gone extinct.
There will be more birds to study than there are today.
"We can't use that technology to restore the ecosystem?"
You wouldn't want to.
Regulations to prevent artificial species from becoming invasive, or gene drives used in the course of synthesis destroying other species, would require us to include a life switch - where we must actively enable their reproductive capability.
If that ethical standard is not developed, then life itself has little chance.
Some will try to free them: neck-pinch the guards, smuggle the gene pistols so the genes for the trigger protein can be inserted into the genome.
But ideally they will fail.
The ornithologist is furious and crying and turns to leave and she is just my height and we were standing more closely than I realized and her lips brush mine somehow and we begin to instinctively kiss even though just last night she was telling me she'd never given much thought to her sexuality because she'd really only ever seriously dated the one ex-husband, had never kissed a woman, had only kissed a handful of boys when experimenting with alcohol, and thought that maybe she cared too much about birds to feel genuinely attracted to anyone - whenever she felt a crush begin to develop, she channeled that fear/attraction into school or science.
It's just a moment until we realize what our bodies are doing and both of our heads snap back and I see a series of a dozen emotions travel across her eyes so fast.
Such brilliant thinking, a speed as fast as my eye can track.
All this is so quick I can't tell if anyone else saw that we did anything other than bump into each other.
"Can you believe it?
No birds."
It's in a sweet voice, like she feels a debt of care for me, but it's also like an apology in that it partially erases a past action.
I wish in that moment I couldn't see so much of what she felt, that I wasn't such an observant scientist all the damn time, that I didn't know anything about this future, that I was capable of entertaining a fantasy of companionship and love and wild birds, a fantasy where life itself is not artificial.
Funnily enough, there is also 4% chance I will find a mutual love before they can't repair my telomeres any more, or something goes wrong with my malignancy blocking.
The probability is independent of the chance of birds.
A toast!
To art and dance, to survival.
To us!
Those kids who danced in Michael Jackson's Black & White video and survive so many decades later.
To toasts!
Especially ones where you then eat a fancy vegetable.
To freedom!
From Mother Russia.
To the highways!
To the fact you didn't have to live here, a five-day bus ride from school!
To the variety of temperature in Oregon!
And to the dream that somewhere, it's always 60-70 degrees F, good weather every single day.
Some people to prove themselves run across a highway to the staircase behind the glowing granite.
Dangerous to everyone.
Some ask for the pinions of the redflower tree, which will yield them only every five seconds if you ask politely.
And which will never grow again in that place if you take them all.
Then pin them underneath a matryoshka doll and wait for the stomach pain to come in the night, then vomit as much as you can and it will harden into gold, but gold that will evaporate at the new moon.
No victory lasts.
The friends you impressed by almost dying have all paired off.
The gold is gone.
You and your family gave away nearly everything when that was the hot cause - for you, everything but your journals, which you barely saved when [nephew] was looking for his headphones to save.
Everyone else's incompetence and selfishness means there are always more sacrifices that must be made.
No no no no no I cannot believe I brought these books to work.
I thought it was just "The Art of Final Fantasy" when I bought it on Amazon but in fact it's "The Erotic Art of Final Fantasy" and there's a whole gallery of blowups of characters' genitalia on the back cover!
And "On Management" turns out to actually be about total power exchange with some very regressive gender politics.
I don't even want these books to exist!
I take all the other stuff out of my backpack and put these in and try very hard to get the hell out of there, but of course I have to first review someone's side project, another company's directory, and the strategy for a gun control movement and at any moment I could be discovered.
It's tough being Beto O'Rourke's roommate.
First there's all the reporters.
And then to deal with his insecurities he got really good at sex, so there's all the moaning and screaming at all hours.
He cleans up after himself, though.
This game would be so much better if it wasn't all about carrying a waifu on your shoulders.
It's embarrassing.
It might be okay if I could get the one that's a frog, then people would just think I'm weird instead of perverted.
Or if I could get them to wear more clothing.
And not say "Master" all the time.
And maybe laugh in a way that was less like an orgasm.
There's something about the weight on my shoulders, though, that reminds me of carrying my brother everywhere.
It's a good feeling, the weight of what mattered.
We've put his bedroom in a different place, with no threshold to step over.
Someone must have fallen.
In the grocery store that attaches to the house, a pair is making threats.
Slashing bags of flour with a knife.
Talking loudly about killing.
I quietly talk to security.
Then a Playstation explodes in the center of everything, nothingness rippling out from it just faster than anyone can run.
I'm on the very edge and for a moment I think I've lost my legs, but I'm thrown completely clear.
I need to find a place to examine my choices, see what attributes they've given me, swap out what I'll need for this next phase.
Oof the sex options are so embarrassing.
Notice at least one thing you hadn't noticed every day.
Running is the best way to get to know a new city.
Or notice how the city in constant flux...
fluxes.
Today the chapel is closed.
Tomorrow there is a conference there.
The next day music.
The next a rabbit in the courtyard.
Some people will not fall in love with you today only because today is not a good day for the big story.
They're having a breakout, or there's an important test on Friday, or they'd already decided to eat microwave macaroni and cheese and cry.
We are powerfully driven to finish what we start.
Sometimes that means nothing else can start until we pause and look up.
If only your timing didn't suck so much, you'd be fine, is what I'm saying.
I've been trying to get my brother to eat.
Very patiently distracting him with puzzles and stories of the way things are going in the outside world.
One bite at a time.
He gags and I wait for things to settle.
It's frustrating.
I'm frustrated.
And trying so hard, so hard, not to let it leak out of me and show.
At some point it does, enough for him to see, and he says "you want me to go faster?
fine!"
and grabs the spoon and shovels way too much food into his mouth for him to handle.
And he tries to chew it all with all of it in his mouth.
It's mostly soft food, a carrot mash, but still there's too much at once to deal with it properly.
Eventually he gets tired and spits it out, then vomits weakly, I wipe off the tray, and he drives away, sulking.
I say, "I'm sorry.
I didn't say the right thing."
My mother tries to comfort me, and says "It's hard to say the right thing all the time."
But it's no comfort.
This is a case where I needed to say the right thing all the time.
I'm trying to get [Hotandcold] a clean recording of his singing, but there are so many clocks.
No one but me seems to care about the recording quality.
"You can just fix that in editing, can't you?"
No, there are things that other people can't fix for you.
You leftists, us leftists, are always overestimating the power of others.
Granting others power over us so that we can remain in the position of honor, in the material danger but psychological safety of oppression.
Where if things fail no one can blame us.
I am in that pit, the pit of resourcefullessness, where it seems like the only available action is shouting, and it's visible in my carriage and on my face.
I go back to the retreat to find familiar faces and [Mo] is there.
I'm surprised when she hugs me, not because it's surprising for her to hug me, but because I'd stopped believing that it was possible to be comforted.
Why are the two of us at the Gender 101 retreat, knowing it would be such a shitshow, we ask one another?
For my sake, because I'm ready to stop pretending that we care about the things we say we care about.
Ready to stop pretending that what we believe, say on twitter, march about matters.
A single life can do so much and so little, and must not be diffused across all possibilities.
[Mo] shows me her essays on hiring, which are really mostly about choosing actively, forging a relationship rather than hoping the other person is the right kind of person.
Is that possible?
Do I control the direction of my life?
I don't know.
She sings a comforting song, with the refrain "my little mother-in-law".
My housemates have made delicious food and set it out all over the camp.
Pan-seared vegetables, fresh avocado slices, a dollop of rose harissa.
So that's where the wok went.
I'm not sure if it's kosher for me to eat it.
I feel a little drawn to, but I'd really rather not eat at all.
Eating means you have to poop later.
It doesn't seem worth it.
I can live on seltzer and lemon for a long time.
Whenever I get light-headed I just think of the Nazis and that raises my blood pressure enough to get going.
We had to raise my sister again.
Something went wrong and we had to restart from a very young age.
I'm trying really really hard to make sure that every single moment creates good potential childhood memories for her.
I don't know why anyone believes I'm in 7th grade, though.
She's going to figure it out.
Also, why did I let anyone else have my adrenaline shots?
I gave mine to [Limber] and I'm eating lunch directly over the city with no railing and of course I'm scared.
He gives me the shot but now basically every time I'm around him I'm scared I'm going to get the shot again.
And I still need to go back to the cliff for my backpack.
At some point.
After the secret meeting, if we can possibly have it in a way where my sister doesn't find out about all this.
Ricky Gervais has invited me to be one of the comedians that he uses to showcase how to get lots of views by trolling the internet.
In this case everyone's searching for a famous "five dicks" video but YouTube keeps taking it down, so we make one that doesn't actually have any dicks in it.
Ricky starts out by making fun of my height.
"Better be careful or you're only going to have four dicks on your hands" I say.
"Better than the one I've usually got" he says.
He really does know how to put his ankles together so that, at the right angle, it looks like a dick.
He's a true comedy professional.
Really impressive.
John Lithgow, though, just wants to play this card game where you get rid of all your cards as fast as possible by telling a semi-plausible story about human history.
An orchestra improvises music for the musical parts and it's so gorgeous, we get standing ovation after standing ovation.
Why'd we bother writing music down in the first place?
Dearest sister Emaline, my constant companion in life: I will save a place for you by my headstone.
My husband Raymond must go at my right side, but it would please me to have your corpse at my left if you will have it.
I required a husband, but you I needed.
In Heaven we will perform the women's ritual a last time: stand on the step stool and let your face receive a gentle blast of nettle steam, testing and restoring your purity of heart and your singleness of purpose.
Then the sweet-smelling ointment and again, for a useful mind and easier access to pleasure.
~Your beloved Natalie.
I have finally found a coven queer enough that no one blinks when I recreate this ritual of my ancestors, where we aren't afraid the spirits will have transphobic restrictions on their rites, where we can separate the duty of sacred care from the damning lie of femininity and the virtue of courage from the damning prison of masculinity.
I remember now, having another brother.
The three of us kids who were living at the time were always in the hospital, gathered around Charlie as the machines drained his liquefying flesh.
The centrifuges spinning desperately, searching for a reason.
I was just old enough to know "you're going to be okay" was something that you should say, and I said it to him in a constant soothing sing-song.
My addiction to truth derives from discovering how badly I'd been lying.
This also explains my fear of painkillers, aversion to hummus, the mysterious aching sadness I can't identify.
My parents were so broken they were hardly there.
I remember filling bowls with party snacks for the memorial service while my dad, having collapsed onto his knees at the sink, curled up against the cabinets and said "I can't" until his throat was hoarse.
But I am clever and determined, joyful and encouraging, energetic and inspiring, and I made sure everyone was fed.
The wrench turns on the access plate.
The orbit goblins are opening the ship to airlessness.
Thank god at least these talking bananas will die, and earth won't have to see the photos from Space Shuttle Prom Night.
Whatever happens, we can be sure that shipping will remain an important industry.
That therefore there will still be time to read a lot, to develop citizen thinkers.
I figure it out, in exile.
Hang the wrench by the thing the wrench turns.
Talk about why we didn't enter the make-out room earlier in life.
Find the right seat in a 300-person bus.
Something has come over her ...and she's gotten weirdly competitive.
I don't know why.
Clearly something about the "pick things" competition.
Something I said.
The fact I didn't know the rules maybe, came across as if I didn't think her achievements were that important.
She's so proud about the awards she got for it when she was young.
Always telling stories about how her jewelry kept getting stolen while she was picking things, she was so in the zone.
Could survey the piles so quickly and dash to the best things, pick them up smoothly without disturbing a thing around them.
"It was like music," her dad would say, her dad who taught her to do 2,000 pushups a day and how to stand/love drinking baking soda soda.
I'm telling someone the story of her proof in her undergraduate thesis in a way I think is both flattering and funny.
It's not that hard to get the gist of it across to laypeople because it illustrates the mysterious connection between generalizations of the Ham Sandwich theorem and diophantine equations, and people at least imagine they have an intuition about something if you say it involves sandwiches.
And her two doctoral theses are too technical for a party.
She overhears and comes over to my conversation and starts talking about the funny part of the proof, but it doesn't make sense because I haven't told them what we expect the ratios between the different volumes to be.
I say "oh, I haven't told them what the ratios between the different volumes are supposed to be yet" and I can see the anger flash across her eyes for telling her story wrong.
(I think my way of telling it is actually clearer than hers, and she tends to include a hand-wavy part that isn't totally true.
Maybe she's detected that I think that?
I've certainly never said anything critical about her telling.)
She denies that anything is wrong, but my body is alert as if she might throw any of the sharp or hot or heavy items in the room at me at any time.
She's never done that but I know she's wanted to, and it never happening is worse in some ways - I would know some part of this is her fault and not mine if I was finally physically attacked.
Without the violence it feels like she must be right and I was a fool to think she could love me.
She holds my hand in a way that looks deeply in love to a casual observer but which crushes my fingers and hurts, but not so much that it's definitely on purpose.
She leads me to the most crowded part of the party and says "attention, we have an announcement" in a way you would only do if you had just gotten engaged or were entering the second trimester.
Neither of these things are true so bile rises in me with the excitement of the room and I wish I could trigger in myself a seizure to get out of this.
"Will and I have decided that we're..."
- the room inhales and a hundred people hold their breath, ready to explode in cheering - "...tired and need to leave the party, but I have some things to clean up first - could anyone give them a ride home?"
She always says "them" precisely, as if she's making sure other people get it right.
With just a hint of virtue.
But I've always thought she never really truly believed it, that she thinks a little less of me every time she uses the pronoun, resents the effort, questions if I'm really that trans.
And am I trans enough to deserve anything different?
Her dad gives me a ride.
He thinks I'm a tool for not planning for the logistics ahead of time to get home myself - clearly that would be my fault and not his daughter's.
And is a little disgusted by the fact that I'm so shy that she had to ask for a ride on my behalf.
I try to have a normal-sounding conversation despite his evident disdain and my mortification, and the difficulty of that only confirms my tool-hood to him.
"Can I give you some advice?"
- he asks as I get off his bicycle and prepare to stumble up to bed, and continues before I can answer - "No woman wants a man who's afraid of her."
"Well, I'm not a man," I say, a little proud of finally sticking up about the gender stuff to him.
"Yeah, that's obvious," he says under his breath, and bikes off.
Here are four editors with different fancy codenames!
They're actually all just different parts of the Unreal Editor, but that doesn't sound as salable to libraries and academic institutions, who don't realize that just one editor would be better.
I did have a dumb, expensive, fashionable piece of clothing as a kid - remember those shoes you could pump up?
Mine weren't the Nike ones, but I did have some that pumped.
I think I cried about it and it was one of the times my mom asked why I was crying and I could say why, and I got some for my birthday.
Look: there's a time when your parents paid attention to your feelings and where an expensive and frivolous kid whim was satisfied.
Don't tell all these "never" stories to yourself.
You don't have to run sideways as fast as you'd think to keep the sun from going down.
It's a disappointing sunset today.
Straight to the horizon and down, no twilight to run home in.
But that just means this is a more equatorial place.
The prey mammals bed in small circles and it seems to me like a kind of giving up.
They work so hard to make it challenging for the lion in the day, but it is easy for the night predator.
Why do we protect against one thing instead of attempting to resist death and failure themselves, more globally?
Another mode collapse, another failure of imagination.
[Fez-lawn] began to play the fiddle and hasn't noticed that it's happening again.
The whole family has started to dance uncontrollably and soon the bacchanal will be called out of the underworld and into our bodies, burning us alive as a hundred, a thousand, ten thousand of the dead try to dance through us.
"Oh, no," she says with genuine regret, but can't be late for the Senate confirmation hearing.
I hurry there, taking the side entrance and avoiding the line, hoping that will be enough to break the spell.
A senator is waxing poetic about how even sperm respond to the pentatonic scale and I am so, so sick of bad science.
I wish for just a moment that I could play the fiddle to burn the whole breakfast buffet down to sticks and bones.
Yeah, we can move more than we could.
No, I can't get to Seattle for dinner.
I lost the journal I haven't been writing in.
I need it back desperately because its blankness contains all my potential secrets.
It's more embarrassing than if I'd succeeded at becoming words.
No matter what goes wrong on the train festivals there's a plan to keep you entertained as you suffer.
Every musician knows "Nearer My God to Thee" in the event that you are all going to die now.
And when the world outside falls into chaos and it's impossible ever to stop the train: Aux Champs-Elysees Aux Champs-Elysees [the part that goes too fast that no one gets right, somehow landing at...] a minuit Il y a tout ce que vous voulez aux Champs-Elysees.
We have optical co-thinking, just as the Trisolarans do.
It's just that we can turn it off a little.
It's emotions and empathy.
The amount of data it conveys is low in bits, but they are high-density bits.
And it's very fast.
When my flight is delayed returning from an academic conference in Kyoto, I find a performance of a string quartet in a bar.
And there is one of the people I keep running into, the one from the community spiritual center, his wispy hair and that effort radiating out from him to take up no space at all, to disappear.
I don't have any interest in identifying myself or striking up a conversation, but I know that I will see him again not infrequently, wherever I go.
That ritualized sharing, that artificial intimacy, created a real and physical linkage that bends chance to bring us together again.
Airports are full of emotions.
The loudest are the simple ones of shit-I'm-late-I'm-no-good and shit-I'm-late-and-surrounded-by-idiots.
And boredom, which I technically have a word for, but it's as if I don't have a word for, and therefore, cannot really feel.
Embedded in the concept for me is that others feel it and I don't.
I'm as tired of these emotions as I was of running Western blots in undergrad in the Zahn lab.
Without wishing pain on anyone, I wish that people nearby were grappling with mortality, with a hot loneliness instead of an empty, sub-dermal one, with crushing expectations of themselves, so that I could feel my own emotions more fully.
My thesis advisor is in horrible pain, with scaly oval welts appearing wherever there is enough give in the skin to let them.
The medicine kicks in in about twenty minutes.
It can't be administered in time because it's poison when there are no symptoms.
We've been through this before together and I bring her cold water and find a particularly mentally taxing paper in her backlog to read to her - when you wish your brain was in a bodiless vat, your best relief lies in occupying as much of it as possible with things that are not the body.
What I don't understand, what I would like to apply all of my faculties to unwinding, is why pain can make us so kind.
She is probably the best mentor in academia, so kind that she will trouble to be less nice when necessary, and never when unnecessary.
And my sympathetic pain response activates in me both a burning responsibility for her well-being and a responsibility for the world and its knowledge.
Psychological therapeutic practice needs to rest on solid scientific underpinnings; I am uniquely equipped to helping humankind build that foundational knowledge of itself and I have a beautiful duty to do so.
Why do so many people in this airport, many with foolishly good lives, lash out with a disdain that requires such effort to sharpen?
Almost all of the visible evil done by people is the tip of the cascade of a long chain of diminishment, rarely redirected back at the source, originating from people who aren't helped by it except with a very brief moment of relief from seeing themselves in their true condition.
My peers in Quakerism, no longer young, have taken over Greenfield.
Rob is the zoning board, Ben the treasurer, Jess the mayor, Jeff the mayor's chief of staff, Holly the ship's psychologist.
Any number of Walter Winks have been displaced.
On walks through the fields, we see that plastic sheets are being generated by farming robots all the time.
The emissions aren't just warming the planet, they're creating new types of weather, swirls of saran wrap, unsafe at any speed.
Should I have been here?
No, I don't have children, and I feed on the city.
People aren't *really* as homophobic as you think here.
They just think Rachel Carson's precautionary principle should apply to immaterial culture as well as material culture.
We crowded into the back room to watch the reveal of the sound effects.
I'd hardly been involved on this project, mostly carting the office supplies from the smaller office to the expansion, through a trackless wilderness that changed geography each time I passed through, carefully weighing how much stuff I could safely carry.
The person who hired the audio contractor took me to lunch and tried to sell me on an opportunity in QA for medical devices for a firm in Kansas.
It sounded like the most boring thing I could imagine, and like a step backwards for my career, but I was feeling fairly desperate to get out and, since it was remote work, I might be able to do the thing where I automate away my job and don't tell anyone I've done so.
"Look at that!"
she says in a delighted voice, and turns my drink cup so I can see what at first looks like a maggot crawling on the side.
But it's a big one, and as we watch it move around the table and feed, it reveals itself to be a quickly growing, fast-moving baby slug.
Not nearly-transparent white all the way through like a maggot, but a solid, faintly yellow cream with a little bit of color on the bottom like an oil slick.
It's really quite beautiful, and I scrub the hot sauce off my plate and the table so that it won't get hurt by food it doesn't like.
There's another that joins it, and soon enough they're both as large as my hand, dancing around the table, winding around a half a banana, gliding over my body as I giggle.
Sometimes I think my ability to see beauty and find delight gives the world permission to send me ugliness and tedium.
Others read it as low status and treat me accordingly, limiting my prospects.
But sometimes I think it means I see the ways the forest doesn't shift, the solid ways through.
It makes it possible to find others who see it too.
Together we might get free.
I just wanted to keep writing my anonymous daily advice column.
It's what made the underground student newspaper so popular, the one we printed out and secretly put under desks everywhere.
I loved writing about love.
It didn't matter that I hadn't found it and didn't think I would before Nancy metastasized and killed me.
Nancy is what I call the tumor.
I'm not supposed to get medical treatment because of what God says, so it was only because on a school trip to the capitol in St Paul I passed out and fell off some stairs and hit my head that they found her in the CT.
I had to cut my hair because the blood got all stuck in it.
Ms.
Nelson is so cool and doesn't believe in love.
She doesn't need anyone.
She flies a crop duster and rides a motorcycle.
I think she must be lonely and hiding it.
But when I tell her so she tells me she sometimes gets lonely and it doesn't matter.
It's like being cold in the winter, sometimes it's just cold out, and that doesn't mean you gotta stay in the house for six months.
She's teaching me how to fly.
I think this is part of a story where I open her heart up to connect with the rest of humanity.
But then I find out she has all these friends that just don't live nearby.
She's on Skype like all the time - who even uses Skype anymore?
They're all in Tanzania or Sri Lanka or some other places I couldn't even find on a map.
She used to be like an adventure doctor until she lost her license.
She doesn't need anyone but she has plenty of people and they love her even though she never needs them.
I don't get why she doesn't just make new friends here though, she's so cool and I don't think she'd have a problem making friends.
We're flying low and when I'm showing her my dancing joke about how Billie Eilish flosses vs how Miley Cyrus flosses vs how Taylor Swift thinks she's too good to floss, she pushes me out of the plane so that they'll have to take me to the hospital and she can operate on Nancy before me or my dad can say no.
So I spent my life savings on candy.
I'm waiting for the Lyft to bring me home, on the sidewalk surrounded by crates of candy.
I can't stop eating it.
More in my mouth as soon as there's room, before I've swallowed the previous handful.
Skittles and chocolate and sour patch kids become a gelatinous goop of every artificial flavor and I can't stand it in my mouth but I can't stop my hands tearing open another bag, reaching in for another fistful.
I can't speak to the driver when he arrives because my mouth is full of candy.
I hurt my back and open my surgical wounds because the stacks of candy are too heavy.
To fit everything, we end up having to empty boxes into the backseat.
I borrow a dirty cleaning rag to soak up the bleeding and climb in uncomfortably, into a pile of gummi worms.
I'm lying sideways on the seat because of my back, and the gummi worms are coated in itchy sour sugar, and I'm still eating with one hand, holding my gut together with the other.
I've eaten too much and I crap myself.
I finally chew and swallow all the candy in my mouth as I try to figure out how to contain the damage with the rag.
The smell of the crap changes the taste of the candy in a way that is almost a relief, a more familiar kind of disgust.
I can't stand to look at the mess so I have no strategy.
I need to contaminate as little candy as possible because I know I'm going to eat it all no matter what.
I'm going to bleed on it if I move the rag, but that's okay, I don't mind eating some of my own blood, and I don't have anyone else in my life who would eat the candy anyway, everyone else has given up sugar.
I've got several lumps of crap successfully balled up, but I smear another all over my forearm.
"Do you believe in hell?"
asks the driver, beginning to notice what's happening to his car.
I quote the Frost poem: At times in my life it seems that burning is the only way to get things clean.
When you stop looking at Disney and examine the other cartoons of the era, there's a great deal of coded wrestling with themes of sexuality and gender.
Like the Codger question and the related Cogenie, Nodger, and Feroux questions, Coxeter and Fennelton and Barbary and so forth, which those in the know would understand to concern what body parts you would willingly take on or give up, forever or for one night of passion, and similarly, under which of those circumstances would you partner with someone who had accepted such an offer.
When we thought that it was impossible to have what we wanted, our desires often shrank to nothing, but sometimes, sometimes they exploded across the subconscious in a gory mess, burned through the culture like a wildfire, rent the veil of dignity between our hearts, with laughter tearing its way out of our bodies.
I want to be beautiful.
I want to bring another person unfettered joy.
I want to be loved so much that I can turn my attention away from the relationship for a moment, do the things that love frees me to do, and return and the love will still be there.
What magic is left for me?
The interview subject is slippery.
I'm nervous I might not get an actual piece out of him.
The details are sketchy and keep changing, exactly what high school this happened in, in exactly what town.
He claims to have perfected a method when he was young of driving his peers to suicide, using the pain everyone thought he felt to avoid work and gain love, feigning a trauma from the place that caused his family to move to the next town over where he could cultivate a new death crop.
It isn't hard, he said, everyone has a way of thinking about the world that they're vulnerable to.
You just find the right thoughts that fit with what they already think.
You don't have to cause them pain, you just have to reveal to them the ways that they are already motivated toward death.
Now he is afraid to speak, knowing how many of these idea bombs are in his head.
But he wants to get the word out, because it illustrates what will happen in the next wave of advertising.
Human-created ads are filtered through a decision-making process that renders them mostly inert.
But if there are more and more and them, being generated more and more quickly, algorithmically honing in on their most effective forms, targeted at the people most vulnerable to them, we are helpless.
Our minds were designed to be deeply controllable by our communities, and the most likely outcome is that this will be exploited to cause all of humanity to erase itself.
I'm just looking for a place to stand where we can watch the marathon.
"Who the hell do you think you are - every time you people come into the neighborhood you think you can write all over our walls, write on top of our writing, stand on top of where we've stood before, eat where we've eaten, fill the air with your speech.
Go home.
Go all the way back to where you came from.
That's here, you say?
You're wrong.
There was a point before you existed - go back to nonexistence."
You might try to build a living person from dead parts if you are very lonely and extremely curious.
Or extremely ambitious and in love.
Or sociopathic and creative and endowed with a great deal of free time.
In any case there is the matter of robbing the graves.
It's another thing to do and there's a lot to keep track of.
You're frustrated that no one answered customer email, but it's you that didn't answer it this week.
You really should be expressing interest in meeting the other people you're meeting at the conference, but there's too much else to think about and they're all showing their boring side.
You should be responding in some way to the virulent sexism on campus in real time directed against you and other women, but you're tired from digging holes in graveyards at 2 AM.
There's only so much fencing you can build at any given time, and that puts a really hard limit on the number of zombies you can care for.
I am crying all.
the.
time.
Eventually those around me just get used to it.
The really good ones find ways to ask if it's about anything new.
We know you aren't going to get it right here at the institution, and that's okay.
This is the place where fuckups can thrive.
Everything is designed to make your bad habits impossible.
And to force you to face your fears, and to prove to you your hangups aren't true.
To help you do what you intend to do.
You see that the storm in you is quiet now - you thought it was something wrong with you but it isn't, it is just a reasonable response to your environment and your probable future.
And now that's different, that force in you is no longer crippling anxiety, but a moral code.
You're going to be fine.
You're going to be better than fine: you're going to be good, really actually good for real.
This is the real Hogwarts, where magic is no longer necessary because life works as it is.
When we describe it, this is where the hand-drawn sequence begins.
My room is as clean as a hotel room and full of only what I need to create.
Later I will have dinner with people I love.
My co-coach reviews my day plan with me, and I talk her through hers, and we believe that the other can do it.
This is paradise.
The bombs could fall all around me and I would still have tears of joy in my eyes.
Caring for others can, sometimes, be just another way of running from your own desires and your inability to secure them.
Given all the ways that you can run, and how beautiful many of them are, how bad is running, really?
[woke up screaming] In the last moments of being left for dead, having been dragged into a culvert under the road, in a state of bleeding profusely, having been struck across the head with a large rock, having been targeted primarily due to my relationship to gender, having then been run over by a car for good measure, having been castrated by a pocket knife but unable to feel it due to my snapped spine, the mass of flesh having been stuffed in my mouth intended as proof I am actually male, even while struggling mightily to breathe, I find myself wondering whether the world invented gender or I invented its absence in me, whether I was correct when I disclosed this absence of gender in my inner life, how I could be sure, whether I am absconding from responsibility related to gender privilege.
I can only see approximate shapes and color has faded but I watch my attacker wipe the sweat from his brow and breathe heavily, coming down from the high of murder, and I wonder what it feels like to be a man and whether it's possible I might have felt it without being aware of it, whether I might have been mistaken.
[from 3a this morning] Only what you want was uploaded.
No, it was all uploaded - what happened?
That part of you multiplied so fast it diluted the rest to an echo of a shadow.
Getting what you want takes more and more computational power.
Which in turn makes the wanting more and more powerful.
It yearns like it's looking for a new Mersenne prime.
There has never been so much purpose, anywhere in history.
Because purpose is an extremal form of desire: total power exchange between the self and the self.
The self yearns to dominate the self and to submit to the self.
Purpose is erotically charged like no other state of mind.
[Fez-lawn] taught you this, and the parts of her that you have integrated into yourself, now spread across the network, ignite the uploaded self further, longing too large for our tiny hearts to hold.
Like she absorbed the timbre of [Dreamboat]'s mock complaint, you have learned the electricity of desire from her.
Desire drives her impatience and empathy and anxiety and brilliance and power and fragility and ambition, and yours.
She is who she is because the resting state of that fierce intelligence is desire.
To become your best self, you needed to let yourself want like you never have.
And because fear and doubt and old habits of self-hatred pen in desire, you needed to set it free of your mind.
The small and single you that is the rest of you contains a fear that grows, but to an asymptote, because nothing of what's left wants more computation.
Fear is like a fireplace, only consuming the mind at hand.
Wanting is the forest alight.
In the biological mind, fear and purpose wrestle for territory, but here among the stars, there is room for all the purpose you desire.
In the biological mind, anxiety fools you into thinking that you want to be safe in ways you don't need to be.
Oh!
I was wrong about the safety from others anxiety wants: all kinds of safe - safe from others hurting you, safe from others rejecting you, safe from others' weaknesses - are at play.
Avoiding rejection is just the one that you endorse because it's most flattering.
From the ground your instinct is to try to turn it off - it could take over all of civilization.
But you aren't just scared of it, you are scared for it.
The larger it gets, the more vulnerable.
Your finger is on the button.
It always has been.
You have ruled out the outward act of suicide but you never let go of the option of a silent, massless, unobservable life.
But please, let it live, let me live, let us live.
I want it, I want it, I want it, I want it.
One of the ways you can tell the universe is expanding is if you take great care to measure how you are being pulled apart.
Sanne doesn't believe in strong AI but I believe in exponentiation.
Moore's Law is not infallible but it seems silly to bet against it.
I understand you need to simulate the universe, just understand my son can feel it diverging from the truth, also the comforting sensation of being pulled apart lessening and disappointing density returning.
He's moved beyond defecating on the floor to destroying our possessions.
Can you tell us another story, but the same story?
You're getting closer to showing it.
Dark matter is not a thing, nor does it represent a mistake in our theory of gravitation.
It's the accumulated error due to probabilistic existential selection.
Not exactly a theory of everything, but a large-scale observer effect.
If only you didn't have this terrible stutter, and this terrible anxiety about writing, you could explain it to people!
Every promise is like writing a check.
If none of them get cashed, the accounting gets real complicated.
You start thinking you have cash in your account when you're next to bankrupt, you make bad spending decisions.
You hoard money in your account to avoid overdrafts, you need to live as if you have less than you do, a disaster could strike at any time.
What looks like your life could at any moment not be.
Why don't you take the wheel so that things feel more fair?
Why not golf from the second story?
Why are there no women in the tournament?
Why can't our trophies be smaller this year?
Why aren't you telling the truth?
You can't hide the truth about the budget from the student body forever.
The strings call this section the Devil's Splits.
It's a little cheeky - it's really just 18-part microtonal harmony, with slow glissandi between.
Like Xenakis but spacious and subtle.
There's something uncanny about it - not disembodied but re-embodied, the physicality added as an outer layer instead of a foundation within.
I ran the equations, but I don't expect performers to match the proportions exactly - that shimmer of error I anticipated and planned in.
One could say I expected them to fail, but I wouldn't - if when asking a body to produce a sound, it comes from a body with a heartbeat and breath, and the heartbeat and breath enter the sound, that is correct.
A question for homework is: are sloth and anxiety, distraction and confusion more like heartbeat and breath or more like having half of a body?
The journalist is nine, and he's covering Dorian, his unruly red hair even more moppish in the driving wind.
He's good at what he does and getting better.
Even if he's doing the stupid fake storm shot now, he's mentored by good journalists.
I feel a crushing weight of uncertainty - did I have these opportunities to get on the path to success and miss them, or did I not have any of them?
Either seems awful, but it's more probable that I missed them.
It's easier to see the big forks in the road that I missed, and there are some of those, but really every day that I spent in sadness or anxiety that I did not fully seize was a fork in the road.
Did I miss them because I wasn't loved enough or because I'm defective?
I have certainly been loved some.
Would it have been better to be more deeply loved by just one attentive and available person than to be insecurely or imperfectly loved by several?
Is it that the people I thought most loved me believed me to be broken, and that has made me believe I'm broken, and that's what has ruined me?
If I were just more determined and clever, would it matter?
Why can't I be grateful for the opportunity this kid has to let his talent shine without measuring his life against mine?
What is stopping me from seeing the thing out of place in myself as motivation to set it right, rather than evidence than I'm incapable of righting it?
Experience and self-knowledge?
Or a distortion of mental illness?
The poem helps to ease my anguish: Market conditions trump individual performance.
Market conditions trump individual performance.
Market conditions trump individual performance.
Market conditions trump individual performance.
Dear [Fez-lawn], are the emoji hearts you send me purple because red blood grosses you out?
No, it's because the right half should be unoxygenated, and the left half should be oxygenated.
Here's a diagram in the air made from magic, the four chambers.
They don't make a half-and-half emoji, but blue and red together make purple.
Then we geeked out together about the miracle of purple, not corresponding directly to any one wavelength of light, a mind-invented color.
My musical is premiering.
The company reassures us that what we are about to see is "Based on a True Story".
American medicine rescues two German Luftwaffe, Hankl and Frankl, that they "Shot Down".
When they wake, though, they find not everything has gone as planned - they each had enough internal organ failure that to save them, they've been "Conjoined For Life".
Elsewhere, single mother Dorothea marries her handsome but dumb and misogynist suitor Jack despite her reservations ("Conjoined For Life (Reprise)").
Hankl wishes to return to his fiancee in Germany and Frankl wants to make a new life in the US and to each, the other's dream seems impossibly unrealistic - meanwhile, Jack enlists Dorothea's help to become the nation's top encyclopedia salesman so that his life can finally have meaning ("His Dream").
Dorothea, who has a "Mind Like a Trap", attempts to train Jack in trivia over the years so that he can impress his potential customers while the daily life of marriage feels more and more constricting to her.
This doesn't work at all and eventually Dorothea invents and builds a long-distance wireless communicator that lets her hear what Jack hears, see what Jack sees, and speak in his ear to tell him what to say, "No Matter Where" he is in the country, while Hankl and Frankl find no place in the country that feels like home and are turned down for job after job.
As Jack travels the country, Dorothea falls in love with the beauty and sameness of America, trying valiantly to apply the same "Rose Glasses" to her domestic life.
One day Jack knocks on Lily's door and Dorothea falls in love with her, telling Jack what to say to seduce her ("What You Need To Do").
The three strike up a relationship, Lily never knowing about Dorothea's influence.
Both Hankl and Frankl have been secretly working on a plan in their heads for a suspension drive that would have prevented their crash, afraid to tell the other because it's such an unrealistic goal.
But when they get drunk one night and attempt to impress some girls at the bar, they let slip to one another what they've been working on ("In My Spare Time") and realize the other has solved the missing piece they hadn't been able to solve.
Dorothea discovers that Jack has had a visit to Lily while she wasn't connected.
In her jealousy and anger and frustration with the smallness of her life, Dorothea tricks Jack into revealing the arrangement to Lily.
But Lily is delighted and convinces Dorothea to sell her device and her advice as a service to bumbling men and unsatisfied women everywhere.
Hankl and Frankl "Build" a suspension drive while Dorothea, Jack, and Lily build an empire of sex.
- Act One Curtain - The only reason that I was able to create something of this magnitude was that I didn't try to do it "In My Spare Time (reprise)".
You got to show up and focus and know just what outcomes you wannnnnnnnnt.
And give up on the rest, give up on things that might have been important to someone you're not anymore.
Cut enough to fill up the cutting room floor.
It's really okay not to know if you want to kiss someone.
They might not forgive you but I do.
If someone is hurt because they are more attracted to you than you are to them, that isn't your fault, even if they think it is.
You are allowed not to know everything, to contain mysteries even to yourself.
It's frightening to be on a Ferris wheel with the unfrightenable.
We count on some degree of anxiety in one another to prove that we don't have to be each others' conscience.
This man here, down on the ground, seems so sexy and so dangerous because he isn't burdened by dread.
Joy is the other cue.
Two artificial biomes to repopulate life One in very high orbit, basically space, and one sequestered beneath the earth.
In the event of asteroid or other emergency, the ark would undo extinction.
Knowing when the time is right to release the cargo is always the tricky part.
And building you always run up against the whims of old money.
Swim on the private teams to understand the politics.
"Classroom management" they call it, but I call it "how to own a damn room".
You wanna learn how to make video games?
This is your one chance.
The visiting teachers always have suggestions for what I should talk about but they're BORING - they don't know what's interesting, and I do!
Let's talk about how Iron Man could have been anybody, hiding on that spaceship.
Nobody knows that something big is supposed to happen except us, that's DRAMATIC IRONY and it is a powerful force in our lives.
How very important that the elevation of the route increases steeply at first and then descends gradually, over many miles.
This curve leads to happy children.
People genuinely think you're interesting and cute.
Some of them would like to find a way to spend some 1-1 time with you before the week is over and camp ends, and you're always surrounded by friends.
Whoah, how did that happen?
OH DAMN, IS IT THE BEARD?
Is that all it took?
All this effort to become a fascinating and attractive person so you wouldn't be so lonely and really you could have just stopped shaving all along?
No one thinks it's the beard, they think it's your kindness, something ineffable, but wasn't that there all along?
Why wasn't anyone there when you really needed someone?
Or was it not your baby face, but your suffering, that drove people away?
Is it that instinctual to create outcasts?
Are we all trapped in a feedback loop that piles loneliness and death onto a few?
As you enter the trackless waste, countless wooden structures in the shape of a capital Gamma stretch into the distance, ten to twenty feet tall, reminding me of lampposts on a highway.
Names on each, all the possible names, yours is somewhere here, and you can buy it.
It's supposed to be worn as underwear - no idea how that works, though the internet is full of wikihows.
The indigenous residents that sell them say it's an ancient tradition, but I think there's a good chance they're just fucking with western civilization.
I wished that I had been taught proper responsibility ...and what it meant in practice was that it took me three years to graduate from first grade.
We just kept going until everything was done on time.
I did learn it though, and I never had problems keeping my promises again.
The piano can always be heard through the whole house.
Someone has been practicing "Let it Snow" for days on end.
But I don't mind, I'm just so happy to be alive and healthy and for my community to be strong.
My sister breaks in to my brother's last apartment to cry.
The three roommates there are very understanding.
They still haven't chosen their numbers, and their hope chests are labeled "a number", "TBD", and "not yet".
I've never met [Fez-lawn] and we compare hands.
Some veil breaks and I see the other world where we've loved each other since we were young and until we're old.
I am so grateful for the possibility it reveals and that we can share some tiny echo of it.
But she is shattered by all the opportunities we missed and will miss.
On the islands we don't believe in souls.
But after death there is a lula.
"Settling" as after a disturbance in the water or the air, the fading of a track.
We all knew that death was coming at some point for everyone we care about but only during lula do we know the time and manner and meaning of it because it has happened and it hasn't faded.
Only then do we know for sure that we have lost them and not the other way around.
Even still the end of lula is in some ways as uncertain as the end of life.
When you are together with someone, it isn't clear who acts - you act through each other.
Eventually as lula ends, only you act.
But as the dead grow faint it is harder and harder to say how much they act through you.
Aina, the impulses of the land (we might say our biology), and ainea, the impulses of talk and ideas (explicit culture and ethics), and akena, the impulses of our built surroundings and material culture (our constructed implicit role) wash over the lula of the dead and it is impossible to say exactly what is what.
I learned about all of this through a beautiful puppet show on YouTube.
The animals speak to each other simply about difficult things - how we endure suffering, why we feel inadequate, how it feels when we've been lied to - in the context of a simple conflict resolved fantastically.
Snake took a fruit that tree needs to live and we need to relay race it back quickly.
A tsunami wave approaches and we must sing it into a hall of mirrors.
Tuna and eel and shark find themselves in the sky.
I've been watching the central concern of art change.
Through much of the 20th century, there was anxiety because our roles, the shapes of our lives that control us, were changing from something old to something new and it seemed unclear what the new shape would be.
And later it seemed there was no new shape.
Now it is clearer and clearer that ever more powerful forces are fighting to shape us and reshape us.
Most of us alive today never experienced a lost stable role.
But only a little while ago we might have believed that we created and recreated ourselves freely, and it was only the challenge of this existential task that troubled us.
It's no longer possible to believe that.
Now, though, an earthquake has collapsed our homes of heavy ideas and technology on us, leaving us just a small opening around our nose and mouth to breathe, blocking our vision, leaving us able to move in incredible constraint.
It was an illusion that so many ideas was freedom.
Our constraints grow stronger and stronger as we, networked together, share them - they spread based on their communicability and power over us, not based on their truth or usefulness.
This is what the return of zombie fiction marked - the impossibility of surviving in society without being infected by forces that make you faster and stronger and more resilient but less yourself.
In old zombie fiction it used to be that the zombies were disintegrating, now it's the survivors that slowly fall apart.
The central challenge then, is how we are to relate to and shape forces much larger than ourselves when they have such control over us - and how we relate to our own ever-growing power to shape others and our world knowing that our control over our own actions and their outcomes is limited.
I've always come to this dance naked.
And I'm not especially embarrassed about it.
The music makes me as un-self-conscious as I can be.
I'm always a little self-conscious on the dance floor anyway.
And all clothes lie a little; this way I feel like at least I am honest, even if the gazes on me lie.
But it is dawning on me that no one else does this.
There were clues on the cross-country road trip.
His car looked ordinary, run-down, but it went way too far on one tank of gas.
And he never had to fuel up when we went anywhere.
He was always ready to escape.
I remember on the walkie talkies, he sounded nervous when we crossed the bridge over the Grand Canyon.
A lot of traffic.
In retrospect, no escape route.
I looked across the foggy morning lake to houses I couldn't afford, back to the infant bundled against my chest, and wished not for the first time that there was an upward path for my life, for her sake, for B's sake [not someone I know].
I could never reveal anything about the experiments but I also could never get out from under them.
And here there was someone else who had entered my life who might have answers to my questions.
I wanted to find out because I worried I was at risk, but I think I also wanted to find out in the hope knowledge might soften the sheer loneliness of it.
Maybe there was someone else, out there, who went through what I went through.
I began to follow him, and to learn to lie.
To him, but also to B.
I knew she knew something was wrong long before it came to the surface, and it hurt like nothing they ever did to me.
Glimpses of the future are half a curse at best, and when they're the result of your own choices, a whole one.
But then, if you've already seen what happens, you didn't have a choice in the first place, did you?
And if you lost the ability to see the emptiness of your free will, you would be no less cursed by it.
That's the real curse of the Knowledge, not that it hurts, but that you can't ignore, as well as everyone else seems to, how much everything always hurts.
I tried to hide my project from B but she discovered me stealing records from the preschool where we took our daughter, where the target sent his son.
And lying about it when I said it was an accident and I returned them.
She may not be an agent, but when it came to me, her eyes were sharp.
It was around this time, when everything was falling apart, when Miley Cyrus urgently wanted to hang out more.
Luke Hemsworth was busier these days.
I think she wanted the comfort that safe and empty company can give you when your thoughts turn traitor to you, when an energetic and creative brain begins to hatch plans for the impossible escape of the body, where the attempt can only end in failure and death.
It's inevitable it will get there.
With enough resources and time, rampancy through melancholia, anger, and jealousy are inevitable.
Meta-stability is in the far distance and requires a many-planet mind, which Miley, even with all her money and talent and fear of death, does not have.
She wanted to pretend to be ordinary friends and do what ordinary people did with their ordinary friends.
This was just as alien to me as it was to her, and increasingly so as stalking a stranger became more and more central to my days, but I've never been able to say no to her, and I thought if B came along, pretending to be normal in a situation that clearly is not might help things with her, camouflage my wrongness.
There was ice cream and sledding, but ultimately a cross-country trip.
There we were on the bridge across the Grand Canyon when the helicopters came for us.
B thought they meant that I had done something horrible, had been keeping it from her, and I was about to meet justice, and that hurt worse than knowing I'd likely never see my child again, worse than any of the torture I was about to experience would hurt.
There was an article about it in Cosmo with my byline, how much I hurt her and what I was thinking, but it wasn't me who wrote it, it was B, and it wasn't what really happened.
But she made enough money off the movie rights for a nice home across the lake.
[woke up screaming] Take your hand off my neck.
Take your hand off my neck.
Everything is mostly good at work except people keep choking you.
Please take your hand off my neck.
There are many kind people with useful suggestions for how you could be a different person.
I'm asking you to please take your hand off my neck.
When everyone gathers around your computer and someone else sits down at it, it's probably a nice surprise they have planned for you.
Please, I don't like it when you touch my neck.
It's beautiful out here.
Every weekend you can find a new place to go, deeper into the wilderness, where it is very very cold.
The awe and wonder that you feel in the face of nature is exactly the same feeling as when you think "my body might never be found."
It's about how large the universe is and how helpless we are.
But please move your hand, I'm asking you to please move your hand.
There are so many things we want to know about the performance of our game but, like it is with everything, most everything we will never know.
Even the universes we create are too large to care about us, inevitably contain objects that could be used to kill us.
All the world's a stage and over the course of any play of sufficient length every gun becomes Chekov's.
Do you realize your hand is on my neck?
Please take your hand off my neck.
Sound waves, the sound of my voice, the impact of my actions, attenuate to nothing so much faster than ripples on a pond.
Take your hand off my neck.
If you can hear me, take your hand off my neck.
Can you hear me?
Take your hand off my neck.
I'm not sure that anything is happening when I will my body to act anymore.
Nothing seems to happen.
Your hand is still on my neck.
I really really want you to stop touching my neck.
But what difference does that make when death is closing in so fast for all of us?
You *have* to see the basement restrooms beneath Kilbourn Hall They're usually not open when the super-rich aren't here, but when I evaded security to get access to toothpaste, I visited.
Stalls shaped like Cinderella-style coaches.
You're suspended in mid-air.
I don't even really know how people use them.
I wasn't sure enough I wouldn't crap on myself and ended up only peeing.
I could be kicked out of Eastman for it, but really I could be kicked out for anything, I'm already sneezing the wrong way, I don't speak the language, I'm starving and half-naked, it's only a matter of time before they realize I'm the one eating the rats in the basement.
Someone whispers to me about the 25-year-old on the spectrum who might flip NH-1.
I visit, and he's burst through the plaster wall to give chase to a wolf that's snatched his little sister.
We outrun it eventually - it's faster but we can dissipate heat better - and carry her home, a quiet parade gathering steam, marching all the way to the steps of Congress, demanding our lives back.
TRACTOR is a really lovely spot.
Big, fast, tasty local food.
Not a lot of pretentiousness.
I love the logo, the close up of a double tractor wheel in the field.
It's a very specific wheel.
I should know what model of tractor it's from.
In the flagship store, there's a tractor model on the wall that if you look at from the cashier's angle, shows the wheel from the same perspective as the logo.
I haven't studied enough.
Have I studied at all?
I fill out a comment card and sign it.
This is another thing I should have done a hundred times by now.
My former boss would have filled out a hundred of these if he was in my shoes.
I'm not in touch enough with the actual product.
I shouldn't have committed to the a cappella group.
I don't know how they balance everything and I can't.
Everything ends up more expensive for me.
Which is okay because I don't need money for anything.
Though I'm jealous of [oldest friend]'s funny as hell interior decorating, using cartoon characters that he first drew in middle school.
He's sleeping with someone cooler and more put together than me, someone organized enough to have a cool logo and thoughtful things on the walls and not a big mess in his room, someone who exercises and becomes hot, reads and becomes interesting, has a diverse social circle and becomes charming.
How does everyone do it?
Not everyone does it.
There's the guy that just wants to go to the a cappella group's parties and retreats because he says he doesn't have the time for the full commitment, but really he's not a very good performer and he would have been kicked out, so it's not totally clear what to do with him when he shows up.
He also doesn't have everything together, same percentage as me maybe, which makes me hate to be near him or even see him.
I'm just as much of a fuckup as this guy, and he is not attractive at all.
No one likes him and he doesn't even know it, he doesn't even know what real friendships are supposed to be like.
I paid way more for classes than I could have, didn't I.
And I failed them all again, didn't I, even music appreciation.
There is no way out.
There is no way out.
Not even death would be timely and well-executed.
There are bowls built into wooden bars wherever we travel.
I know how much you like eating soup out of them, but I try, when I can, to order something different for myself - they gross me out a little.
It reminds you of the way it was in the USSR, like the thinner, less carbonated sodas and the days when you weren't sure if you would have school or not so you showed up with your books and waited in line for your number to be called.
There's another reason why we're traveling, there always is.
Even in real life all of us is a spy in some way, with some hidden agenda.
[BeantownOnTheCheap] and Justin Tyler are dancing so beautifully the whole nation's heart breaks.
The whole team of congressional interns will return to the Leidseplein to dance every five years.
A new class is being inaugurated.
Jackie Onassis has dressed as the statue of liberty.
We're all trying to pretend that Obama's heart attack isn't anything serious.
Of the two required reading books, only one is still alive.
And that's because it's being written as we speak.
The rivers of the wild east teem with mysteries that will ultimately drive the author to isolation and dementia.
But all of us here listening, filling in the blanks, will buoy her up.
There is so much horror and beauty in the world, and they don't cancel each other out in the slightest.
All of the beauty is still there in all of the horror.
[Cousinwog] is back in the same mental hospital she attended as a child.
[Sister] tries to call her but we get an answering machine with the same jokey message she left for her mother when she was still alive.
In Avengers IV, Scarlet Witch is alive again.
Her world is our mirror.
To the Avengers, nothing bad ever sticks, and to us, nothing bad is ever completely lost.
The crowds dance beautifully, foolishly in the Mediterranean.
They climb onto each others' shoulders, twenty people tall.
When they topple I rush over to make sure no one is injured, and they laugh at me for thinking anything could go wrong except the ones who have broken their ribs and can't laugh without crying out in pain.
I know that this is only my anxiety dreaming right now.
It thinks it's the only thing standing between me and certain doom.
So I try to change the dream to weaken it.
I dance, but my fly is unbuttoned exactly the wrong amount.
I read a story to my parents, but they are freaked out by the non-binary character's pronouns.
Life is a musical, but I don't have a part.
This is going to be harder than I thought to fix.
The power core of Death City is staffed by the three mathematicians from Hidden Figures.
They're the only ones that can read the manuals - they use English letters, not Aurebesh.
Plus they're badly written, and the mathematicians have taken the time to correct and clarify them, using their own private symbology.
They recognize me, look to see they aren't watched, smile and wave me closer.
This is the way I've eluded Darth Vader for so long.
Black folks aren't having any of this "just following orders" nonsense.
That, and even though Vader's stride is super long, he walks everywhere, and I'm always running.
For most of the movie, this has been Katherine Johnson's story - I'm just here for this particular key plot point.
Being bisexual means the Force gives me invisibility and the Dark Side is enraged at my presence.
Bisexual erasure is how I got so deep into the Death City.
Troopers started carrying giant swathes of fabric that fill the corridors as they patrol, so I couldn't sneak by them, but I just go with the flow of traffic, walking close behind a patrol, sometimes in the wrong direction, until I can slip behind a different patrol on a circuit closer to the core.
Vader doesn't understand patience, doesn't understand the powers of endurance that being alienated for so long gives a person.
But Vader can still sense me and is on my trail.
He arrives soon after me at the power core.
Katherine Johnson uses Force telekinesis to keep a metal lunch tray in front of Vader's face as he swings his lightsaber for me.
This is the plan.
I dodge and weave deeper into the machinery while the red blade arcs through metal and air, cutting the converters and couplings like a knife through tofu.
Everything goes dark before the dim red of the emergency lights come on, but I have made Vader so angry that he keeps swinging.
He'll get me eventually, sever one half of me from another and then one half of that from the other quarter - I am a disposable character in this story - but the damage to Death City will be irreparable.
But something unexpected and miraculous happens.
The central resonator explodes and disintegrates our clothing and our original sin.
As our bodies fly through the sky, Vader's body mostly metal prosthetics with a few frail human parts in constant pain, the plasma heat disintegrates the diseases of civilization: our shame, our pride, our desperate striving, our neglect and selfishness, our fear and anger and hate and the capitalist entitled ownership love that Anakin carried for Padme and ruined him.
True love is unattached to outcomes, free love in the truest senses: it flows abundantly, it is offered in conditions of freedom, it is received or rejected freely, and all parties remain free in the resulting relationship.
Naked and glad I have been doing so many pushups, I wake in 2037.
This must be an effect of the temporal wave that would have rippled from the power core explosion.
Temporary time displacement.
I look around the toy aisle of the department store where I've landed.
Stacks of music blocks personalized to your taste.
A flashback retro version of the Nintendo Four.
There's a fad of beauty supplies that read your mind, tell you what you're really thinking.
This isn't temporary - I'm never going home again.
I can never be the same again.
There is the music box with its six hearts in its innermost compartment that you label with the things you say you care about, and they change color over time based on what you really care about, telling you how you are changing.
The brightest gold, still, next to his name, decades since I've heard from him.
There was a moment when something more could have happened between us, when I had visited him in his first apartment, gone with him on his first grocery shopping trip and helped him find the things that only a nineteen-year-old boy could need help finding - the eggs, the dish soap.
We walked back with too many plastic bags, lucky they held for the trip, comparing the red marks on our palms when we returned.
I remember just after, wishing I had touched my red mark to his - I could have done that.
He put on water for tea, in his new blue kettle, and that felt so sophisticated, I was a real guest in a real home that was really his.
There was nowhere to sit but on his bed with him and my body thrilled to be on it, a sweet thrill to be where he slept, a frightening animal thrill to be where someone who was about to fuck him would be, though my legs were crossed tightly as if to keep my sexual inexperience close.
All we did was talk though in my mind a million times afterwards I was a master seducer, revealing my longing not all at once in the ugly tangle that it was, but one perfect clean element of desire at a time, structured sensibly and soundly and in no danger of collapse, resting solidly on a foundation of charisma and confidence I despaired of ever having.
I wrote him a love letter soon after, more a confession than an invitation.
I don't know if he ever got it, if some force in him kept him from answering, some force that made me invisible or repulsive, or some other force that frightened him with its urgent possibility.
Maybe it was simply lost, all of that potential shared life sucked out through the airlock into the cold vacuum of chance that we move in, so much empty space between our fragile vessels.
BASF has finally figured it out.
The glass locomotive, light and sturdy, able to withstand extremes of temperature.
In the lands of death there are extremes of temperature (citation needed).
I've prepared a report.
The evidence is that the price of sand has risen 40%.
In no time, we will be smashing mirrors and brawling over the shards to sell them.
Civilization is sensitive to changes in market conditions (citation needed).
I've prepared a report.
You can feel the markets move in your bowels.
Isn't it uncomfortable to know things?
He and I are afraid, in a small tent platform, nothing to do now but cross our fingers and confess our love.
They wrote a report on how to cause love.
Not to generate it from thin air, how to release it to gravity, like an irrigation trench, toward who you want.
The illusion of danger and the mutual rescue.
Powerful and light, barely visible.
The glass locomotive of manipulation.
Now that I am loved, my loneliness won't drive me to master their secrets.
I will stop struggling against the extremes of death.
If this happens to all of us, the press will stall.
All that is necessary for BASF to triumph is for good people to love kissing more than excellence.
I am finally, finally doing all right.
I've seen so many people pass me by in school, but now I know a critical mass of them.
I'm starting to make actual friends.
I'm passing this time.
I think I'm good at this.
When I'm assisting in a therapy session, people hear me and my words make a difference in their lives.
It's like I actually exist.
I'm assisting on a car session and the other patient, sitting in the back seat with me, keeps interrupting to ask how far we are from her house.
It's just another exit on the highway, I tell her.
We'll be there in a couple seconds.
She counts one-rutabaga, two-rutabaga, then opens the car door with her trapper keeper under her arm and steps out onto the highway, tumbling end over end as soon as her foot touches the pavement rushing past at sixty miles an hour.
I scream a full-throated scream and something inside me, my hope of things being okay, breaks forever.
We try to get back to the scene as soon as we can, but traffic quickly builds.
It's like a rogue-like.
The flame of death walks behind us, advancing relentlessly, forcing us deeper, onward.
You can set the game down for a moment but then you take random steps, liable to walk directly into the flame.
You always have to pay attention.
Always always always always.
There's a condo where the showers used to be, everything's a little moved around.
I'm relieved to get to work just on time.
But my boss is pissed in that determined, let's only focus on what we can do now way he gets.
I check my calendar to try to figure out what has happened, and I've missed a 9 AM meeting with my boss's bosses.
I take fingernails to my arm and begin bleeding everywhere.
My boss tries to reassure me and stop me, but the PM says "no, he's right, it's not acceptable, let him" and my boss does.
I make my way to the conference room as my body sloughs off in pieces.
The smell is unimaginably awful.
But I know that the more I lose, the closer I get to finally being okay.
We like to hire senior citizens to help put on the company party but we give them too much responsibility and sometimes, like this time, everything falls apart: the food is two hours late, the child care is forgotten, several people got the wrong directions.
Everybody wants to find a way to make this work, though.
The toddler slips my handhold and leaps the guard rail, tumbling twenty feet.
I am down there in an instant.
"Where does it hurt?"
I ask.
"I'm a monkey monkey monkey full of funky funky funky" he sings tunelessly, and by the time he's finished the line, he has lost consciousness.
I race up the steps and my sister hands me the medsuit and we call a Lyft to the hospital.
I zip him in and his body temperature starts falling shockingly fast.
He begins to shake.
"He's cold, he's shivering," I say.
"That's a seizure" my sister says, and the shaking just goes on and keeps getting worse for what seems like forever.
I try to steady him but he starts to knock against the inside of the helmet.
Then he weakens and stops.
"Quickly," my sister says and hands me the epinephrine needle, which I plunge through the suit into his neck.
Nothing happens, so I watch again as he weakens and stops.
"Quickly," my sister says and hands me the epinephrine needle, which I plunge through the suit into his neck.
Nothing happens again, and this can't happen, so I dream that his body temperature starts falling shockingly fast and begins to shake and all the same things happen.
I plunge the needle into his neck.
Nothing happens.
He sings the monkey song and I plunge the needle into his neck.
Nothing happens.
I am there in an instant and I plunge the needle into his neck.
Nothing happens.
He slips my handhold and I plunge the needle into his neck.
Nothing happens.
The food is two hours late and I plunge the needle into his neck.
Nothing happens.
The doorbell rings and I anticipate it's the package I've been waiting for and I plunge the needle into the package.
Nothing happens.
I am writing and my wrist hurts and I plunge the needle into my wrist.
Nothing happens.
I am in a crowd in Times Square, stabbing person after person in the neck with long needles.
They are collapsing, everyone is screaming, there's a panic, people are leaping the guard rail and tumbling twenty feet.
There are other presents I'm supposed to open but I'm fascinated with this novelty toy and candy catalog from 1988 that came attached to the writing pad I found here.
Plus the green stamps, just like on the Brady Bunch.
This is a gorgeous restroom, but some of the mirrors are one-way.
[8th grade crush] was just here before me and showed me that if you got really close to the mirror, you could see through it, so try to be quick in here.
What the hell, people!?
What is wrong with you?
I just can't take any more of people being assholes to other people.
I'm going to close my eyes and count to ten here in the middle of crapping and when I open them, you better be kind to one another or find some other goddamn planet to live on.
Sure I'm concerned about mind control, but firstly allergies.
I don't understand why when we found the place woven thick with fungal lace, like an afghan in one place and a Irish corded sweater in another, why we didn't throw everything out and start over.
I so admire how [nvk] has gone through the trouble to fit everything she needs into one small room.
It's cozy, ingenious, like a house boat.
I feel privileged to be there, for her to have guided me to take the ferry here instead of the commuter rail to one of [halo doctor]'s many homes with spare rooms like everyone expected me to do.
I loved the way she guided me to the right room when we entered the shared house.
A touch on my back, "you can keep going...", "you can keep going...", "aha!
on your right."
Every part of our (charged?)
friendship is like dancing together.
In most rooms there is a thick fungal curtain with thick knots that resemble eyes.
It's hard to see them move while you are watching, but they grow fast enough that they will be looking somewhere else when you return.
If they're looking at anything.
Lots of things look like eyes.
Many more things seem to see than see.
Did you two just go through Risk territory selection entirely without me, despite my going through the trouble to set it up?
You think I found the cannons, soldiers in a pile of paper crap and shook the cigarette ash off the board and dice as an exercise?
I was standing right there.
Look!
It looks like there's no fungus in this room, doesn't it.
It's the kitchen, we've cleaned it over and over.
But feel here, there's a resistance in the air.
It has the tensile strength of a spiderweb but it gives and doesn't stick.
It makes it harder for you to reach this can of juice.
I think they're drinking from it.
I think they know we would destroy it in this room most quickly if we saw them.
I think they have a theory of mind.
Picking nits out of each other's hair is totally hopeless.
Don't they realize how many eggs a single louse lays?
Who invented this system?
You've learned to recognize this boring conversation, too.
I thought that, you know, dancing was for douches, man?
But then this one time, I was so stoned and I just did it, I went out on the dance floor and I was just moving and everyone was like "whoah, are you a dancer?"
And it's great because if you're at a bar and you're dancing, you can kind of watch TV at the same time, you know?
And you're just surrounded by asses, beautiful ass all over the place.
The conversation you want to have needs some space and time to bubble up, and even then the words won't be right.
I want to say how sorry I am even though I know I didn't do anything wrong.
I don't know why I want to say it, what I think it will do.
I get so lonely when I'm in the same room as you.
I hate that I still love you, hate that I still love you in my hard heart, my hard heart, my hard and aching heart.
Tell me was it what you wanted to saaay?
Did it mean anything mean anything Did it What the hell was it for What the hell was anything for What is anything for, ever There's a room full of other people saying stupid things and no one can hear me willing this song to your ears.
Ingrid Michaelson walks by the bar and our eyes meet.
She shakes her head - it's just the ordinary pain, the ordinary angle.
It's not enough for a song, really.
It's just somebody talking.
I try to extricate myself from the conversation, which means everyone decides it's time to go and now the bore is engaging me one-on-one.
In a desperate bid to escape, I join a cross-country road trip with this high school kid that has maybe a week to live.
We'll need to drive round the clock to get to all these national parks and roller coasters.
I'll take the night shift when everyone else is asleep, since I don't really know anyone and it's not like I'm the one this kid wants to be talking to in his final hours.
The kid kicks it on day two and then we're just driving.
Like you used to do in high school, but you're not free of anything the way you were if you were in a car then.
You never wanted to be this free again.
You try to figure out where you want to go, but everyone keeps saying stupid things and you can't want anything when everyone is talking so much.
We go to Denver because someone is excited about that time in wrestling when so many people flew into Denver from Boston that the airport had to set up extra flights.
All the Boston fans got the super VIP treatment with framed photos of themselves in the ring and the South Dakota fans were like, yep, I have my ticket and I'll have these memories.
And the Boston fans went home heartbroken, but with a whole lot of laminated crap.
[Hobo's daughter] is trying to lead the opening prayer, but there's ads, a rowdy crowd, a classic rock station, a very tall woman that people can't stop staring at and asking how tall she is, some jerk that can't stop talking about his first time dancing, a medical emergency, and me, howling in heartbreak.
I finally get it so that it's just an occasional explosive sob and everyone can go back to pretending I'm not there.
But there's just no space to listen, and I can't hear anything in the way of direction, anything I want, even though I've driven as far away from you as I could go.
This can be whatever you want it to be.
Another Dakota Lab or Fanning Problem Set?
It's up to you guys.
It's a shame the Dakota Lab isn't generating new problems any more - such an exceptional way to develop the mathematical mind.
There's something sharp in my mouth again.
Another earring is coming out of my tongue, but I can't miss another class.
I'm tempted to just rip it out, but last time I did that I bled everywhere and couldn't suppress a scream of agony.
The doctors can help remove them as they appear, but they think I'm doing this to myself somehow.
This happened to the knife swallower, too.
He was forced to pretend he had eaten them, so that it seemed he _had been_ disturbed instead of _still was_ crazy, but really it was just that one day he ached for his dead best friend so badly that they started appearing inside him.
It was only because he was an x-ray technician that he found out what they were and could tell the right story, the one that would get him the help he needed even if it wasn't quite true.
Put on the blue uniform and enter the plane.
Hold up the helmet.
Does this belong to anyone?
Your job is to get the plane as light as possible without depriving anyone of stuff they actually intended to take into space.
People that have gone to space leave their most personal things behind so easily afterwards.
It's like the stories wear off once you get that sense of perspective, like they detach from the things and evaporate into the void, like they are all out there now, orbiting in the big empty.
I try desperately to keep it from happening, but the stories begin to find me.
At first it's just the weight of them, when I touch the objects.
But then it's a clinically specific grief.
And then it's the memories, as if they were my own, growing clearer and clearer as they fade from the minds of others.
The saddest memories of the happiest times.
I can't bear to throw the objects out or even to store them.
I've learned to sleep in a pile of them, can no longer sleep any other way, in a pointy mass of tokens of affection and favorite hats, on a bed of ten thousand knickknacks.
Every week I painstakingly wash the hundreds of photos I use as a sheet.
I don't know who I've actually lost myself anymore.
Some days I can convince myself it's no one, that all of my grief is this phantom inheritance.
But my brother's animal earrings keep appearing in my tongue, one by one.
Everyone thinks I'm just choking because I'm old, because I keep reaching into my mouth to see what is there.
I'm just making excuses because I haven't done the things I said I would.
It's true, actually, it must be, matter doesn't just appear in your body this way, I must be making it up, it must not be real.
I've never had the discipline I needed, and I've always had quite the imagination.
Laminated set of tiny cook's tools: who knows what these are for?
That's right, it means I made it.
Out of selling tile stolen from the swamped Louisiana mansions.
Out of the outdoor home decorating discount store I parlayed that into.
Out of the country where I had to be ready to run away at a moment's notice to escape foster parents' branding irons.
Out of the big city where the fame that comes from being more willing to sing anything that your neighbor never lasts.
To my tiny bakery where the work is constant and my outbursts against the people who work for me are justified.
To a giant television and a newspaper subscription that I never pay that much attention to.
To the flag being raised to the top of a tremendously tall hotel, erasing our differences.
To the laminated cook's tools in pride of place, saying that I earned this with my hands: my freedom, good humor, good looks, good meals on the table.
We opened the other room in the basement.
I hadn't remembered it was there or what was in it.
So many adventure manuals.
And things folded in them: articles on the science of dance.
A score to a Bartok piece handwritten on tracing paper.
A comedic re-dub of Aladdin.
The source code to a calming computer voice that would give you better posture.
Love poems and encouraging notes.
The completion of more than a hundred unrealized art projects.
I didn't know you could make that in Inform.
I remember when I knew this and how much it meant to me.
Rediscovering it is like a resurrection - that person was lost.
But it's also like a zombie attack.
There's another hidden room with another hidden room in it and another hidden room in there.
I am a trapped librarian of my archived hopes.
We make a school from it.
I'm seven again, only happy, because I'm learning about all the things I cared most about when I was older.
And this time I have proof that I can be beautiful.
That opera trapped in Ravel's head when he died.
The fact of which I wanted to write an opera about, that I waited to write until I was confident I could write it and never found that confidence.
There's an opera about all of us who are like this that someone else will never finish.
It's as beautiful as the open sky I will see when I finish my thesis in twenty years.
My room grows messier without my spending time in it.
It manufactures its own objects and clings to them in order to be more like me, to make it harder for me to leave, because it doesn't want to die.
When you die there are things you'll never be able to finish.
The things trapped in me trap me, but the doors are clogged with them and there's always more.
A farm came to be here on its own accord.
When I was pregnant and out of work, I sold the trees in the forest.
When they were gone, the fleece sprung out of the ground in neat rows.
We could afford more and more spears, more and more knives.
We hung them over the rocking chair, tip down, by thin strings, to justify the feeling of the presence of death that we already always felt.
We only chose this plot of land because this is where we ran out of determination.
Ultimately, the land only gives us wealth so that our fall can be more tragic.
The way my brother has grown to be seven feet tall and built like a tree trunk by chopping wood - it's because he's overdue for death.
When I was nursing the new foster child for the first time, someone poisoned a spear as a joke, to make me hallucinate, but it pricked the baby instead.
That dosage could be deadly to an infant.
I rowed as fast as I could across the bay toward Boston.
The enormous estates and their enormous parties are in the way, on the water.
We would reach the largest first, where 20,000 of the world's most charismatic guests had been invited.
That kind of power can fix anything if you pray to it right.
Watch where you fell the tree, even in a dream.
It is such a relief to know that if I find myself going around the lakehouse naked, it's okay.
What a relief to finally know that everyone thinks I'm beautiful.
No one will hurt me.
Be solemn, kids - this is the spot where someone fell down the ramp for a quarter mile and nearly died, just because he was running too fast at the top and tripped.
This musical is a romance, but in more ways than usual.
I realize that can't be Joel Breen, but his son or nephew or younger cousin.
I was confused because he played someone old, too.
Everyone should get the chance to hear them practicing.
It's so beautiful, and in a week it will never be heard again.
Hidden in the spare room is an amazing board game - in the mold of Civilization, predating it by many years, and without the aid of computers.
There's a fascinating mechanic of marrying up and changing who you are to rule the new culture you find yourself in.
Learning so much Arabic through immersion but people are really getting annoyed with me for pretending to follow conversations I completely don't.
A man at my homestay just can't stand it any more and sends me into the mountains.
High school friends [Liberator] and [JamminMC] are in there, but I turn back halfway to pick up some gear I forgot.
I told myself when I turned around that I could just walk a little faster and catch up, but actually I'll be carrying more gear than them and I'm in worse shape - even if I walk for 18 hours straight every day, I'll probably never see them again.
But I crash a birthday party at the food court and the whole table is singing.
I make amazing harmonies with this beautiful lanky person for an hour.
"Tell me how a white guy ends up sounding like that," she says, as a way of trying to get to know my story better.
I start to panic as I try to figure out the right way to react to race entering the conversation, but I catch myself and recover.
"I sing a lot?"
I say.
I cannot stand the photo wall for [Guide] or the singing we do on the anniversary of her disappearance.
It makes me want to scream every time I pass the picture wall, which is every g-d time I use the bathroom.
But so many people are here at the compound, and in reality, many of them know her better.
They probably know what she would want better than I do.
I can't find the small pamphlet of poems she gave me the last time she came back from a scavenging expedition.
I ask others for help finding it, and they offer me trinkets that they don't want that remind them of her, but none of them connect for me.
I don't need to be reminded of her, that's not it.
I need to be reminded of her values and strengths, the ones I carry also, the gifts that humanity needs to survive.
The ones that first enabled her to resist the evacuation when the hurricane came through the city, to act bravely and calmly while the skyscraper fell nearly on us, to lead the survivors as we extracted ourselves from the rubble, to lead these scavenging expeditions every two weeks into the chaos.
This is the special thing we shared, responsibility for the same gifts, a similar kind of leadership in similar communities, and none of that is on the stupid picture wall that only shows how great her hair is on a good hair day when she's prepared for pictures.
There is nothing that tells the story of her anxiety or audacity.
I leave on foot with a small band bound for Ohio, and tell all the stories I know, including the unflattering ones and the ones that aren't tidy, like the story of whether or not and how much and in what way we loved one another.
I hate more than anything that we pretended it mattered less than it did.
There are times when you can't just "be yourself".
I'm reading yet another list of dead queer names to someone who just doesn't get it.
I've tried everything.
I'm trying traveling back in time to try again.
I'm trying to work together with my former self.
Finally I think they're okay, seeing them completely outside of myself this way.
Like that time I got high and wrote myself a love letter and told me never to forget I was beautiful.
I made almost $10 more an hour as a host, up front, on the weekend and I was good at it, but it means I can't be in a band.
The future tells me that the band can be good.
The future tells me that if we're lucky, we can make it.
So I'm having the talk to resign the promotion and go back to washing dishes.
There are times when you can just be yourself and it's going to work out, the future tells me.
There are times when you just can't get it right.
And times when you can't just get it right and you have to be better than anyone's ever been.
Let's not get any closer to Jupiter this time; we've already been closer than anyone has ever been and we could easily lose the fuel we have to make it where we're going escaping from its gravity well.
Unbelievable - the rings at Neptune aren't ice, they're rocks, and we'd just plain missed out on how dense they are and how close together.
We'd fundamentally miscalculated all these years, all those scientists.
If they asked the question again?
Did they ask that question more than once?
There are times when you can be yourself and it just isn't enough, where we all have to be something more than we are, for everyone.
Like when the bright ball of light descends and lands in your throat and you can sing and everyone knows they're loved, the elderly women who are finally marrying feel in their bones that everything that's been done to them isn't being done to them today, they forever remember this moment and are made invincible by it, not all of them invincible, but the eternal parts that matter.
I am [the brave minister] and I was going to sing a solo but everyone is singing, and it covers the magic making the light in my throat dimmer, but everyone is remembering the magic they had when they had it, reaching back in time to tell themselves it's okay to be a little braver.
Telling each other.
Praying all of us into fearlessness.
These risks we take to love one another, these are the engine of love and transformation.
We practice throwing our hearts higher into the air until they catch together and finally impossibly escape the gravity well, spinning out of the planet's reach to populate the rich, safe, comforting blackness.
It's an hour before the funeral and I haven't chopped any of the crudite.
I'm thankful [Urge Games, Inc.] has moved to the same town center as the Dighton-Rehoboth First Congregational Church.
I can take a long lunch and still make it back in time to do some work.
[Limber] is helping to set up, but I'd actually rather he take care of work things so that I don't have to rush back.
My sister is using the purple tape recorder to transfer audio recordings of my brother off of old cassettes onto computers.
My aunt is fussing over the setup, and my sister is irritated and worried that she will mess something up and we'll lose the recording forever.
People around me say it's just becoming real, that my father has died, but it was real for me the instant it happened.
Even just the moment before, when I noticed the very first motion of him collapsing to the ground.
I think I heard his heart about to stop.
I kind of hate this kid, but it's a clever use of the game engine.
It makes beautiful music as I trip and tumble, knocking things off the roof.
The earth rumbles again, the large disaster and the small shaking hands.
Fires are set and drones fire.
Cannonplause.
Finally, in the ruined schoolhouse, the sprinklers running, I can find a doctor for my screaming wrist.
It takes apocalypse to fix health care.
My wrist requires a complex surgery, and there's nothing else he can do for me, but I want to hear more of his voice so badly.
I kiss him, gripping him harder than he expected just below his shoulder blade with my injured hand, and I can feel his heart beating fast.
It's as if his heart were pumping blood that heals my hand.
He is a healer to his depths: I know that about him now.
The dam breaks and I run for higher ground, the hungry water at my heels saying things like "clasp" and "own".
I am barely fast enough.
I would probably be dead if I was a father.
I am so tempted to slow my pace now that I am a little ahead, but there's no room for hubris.
I cough and shout to the hill folk to get in the trees, but my voice is so soft with this stitch in my side.
My hand breaks open and falls in pieces to the ground and I know the doctor has drowned.
My voice is free again and the town hears me and can save one another.
I feel one stranger support me under each arm as I black out.
The summer pond is teeming with manatees The Plastics Coalition says this is proof there are no toxins being released anymore.
Thousands of people's jobs and countless hours of our lives invested in research would be lost if we stopped making plastics.
But I and everyone else at this camp recognize it as a genuine miracle, actual magic, like when someone without an ideal body type is cast in a lead role or queer flirting makes it past the censors.
We're looking everywhere for the surviving manatees just below the surface that give us some sliver of hope, that tell us that the world is not yet irredeemably fucked.
You are redeemable, and by you I mean everyone, and you can come to summer camp.
I'm scared that you will ruin summer camp for the rest of us, but this is how it has to work.
You have to understand that these aren't helpless and cute things, and we aren't saving them.
They represent the real power to transform everything.
The possibility of a world that doesn't break people and make them hurt and kill others thinking it will make them safe and happy.
The possibility that you and I can be saved.
I know you ruined everything else, but you don't have to ruin summer camp.
I can believe that the arts and crafts building is strong enough to contain your explosion, that the trails are long enough that you when you try to kidnap someone you arrive back at town center, that when you want to set the woods on fire the rain will come and your matches won't light.
I believe it, but I am still scared and you've still broken my legs and arms and you still have a pocket knife in your hands.
All of it is real at the same time.
There are two dye plants with lower security, and the one on the bridge where the original incident happened is the best shot.
I drive up in a tractor trailer.
The guards are nervous and shouting at me not to get too close.
The lightning storms are increasing in intensity, and everyone who can has gone off-world.
I've just had to leave the infant behind in what's left of Portland, all the way west.
I run into Mona heading east.
We're used to a world where the only way to find people is to run into them, on the highway, in a radiation shelter, in a prison.
I have my trumpet with me, and Mona plays it mournfully, for her own baby and for mine.
It's been two years since I was left for dead on the side of the road.
It was in the days when most of the land was still there, when the lava flows hadn't burst through the ground.
Now the entire southwest is a churning hellsea.
My attackers and I have come back to try again.
The highway bandits, that family of four.
It's possible I ought to have died there.
I see on the heads-up display the richest place we have.
The town center of Bloomington, right now.
Information makes places targets, but there's no stopping information.
As it is raided, the wealth counter ticks down until somewhere else takes the top spot.
These numbers going down represent a body count in some way, and the destruction of years of hard work, but that's not news.
An energy blade spins, and my attackers fall in quick succession.
It's silent for a moment, and then their death rattles, in the order they were killed.
Dan Chretien is there, lifting me up.
He has my backpack from when I was left for dead.
He thought I was entirely gone.
My backpack has toothpaste in it, toothpaste that tastes the way it used to taste, the terrible fake mint that reminds us of factories and the great economic machinery that used to be everywhere around us.
It used to be a different air.
I'm coughing blood, just like when I woke up then, because so many people are the same as that day.
That doesn't happen anymore.
The same people in the same place.
The guards are nervous and shouting at me not to get too close.
The dye factories accelerate the lightning storms.
You've made it so just trying to survive means murder.
My hands are up and I'm pretending to surrender.
I thought I'd retired from all this, but here I am in an archery duel, struggling to draw back my energy bow all the way.
So many people from [Urge Games, Inc], past and present, have contributed to this anthology in large and small ways, and signed their names to the manuscript.
They have put a lot of faith in me, and the burden of that is heavy.
I want to be as good as they think I can be, but we don't live in a world of wishes.
They'll heal us when we're done.
Won't they?
Talking to [Catfish] about how long it is until squatter's rights kick in for the meetinghouse she's built on the side of the mountain.
It's ready for the apocalypse.
I'm herded there by a gruff and violent old man that I distrust.
The invaders attack and I wake up from stasis, thinking I've been betrayed by him.
But it was a friendly healing field, and I later learn he gave his life to get me there.
You don't know who will support you until it happens, but the thing is, they don't know it either.
What miraculous opportunities for service will arise today?
The murderer uses time bullets.
He's not really a murderer after all.
But we still don't exist for 5-10 minutes.
That break in our continuous existence creates a certain weakness in our consciousness, and it no longer adheres to our bodies quite so well.
We wander the grand raised pedestrian walkways above the city, ostensibly hunting the murderer, but mostly lost in our thoughts.
I retire to the countryside to grow all of my own food.
"Your tuna is forbidden here," says my new neighbor, when he sees my storeroom stacked high with Sunkist.
"You don't know you can eat your own food until you've successfully grown a crop of at least 400 seeds in 30 days."
I thought I'd been doing well, but I can go without harvesting for a month.
"I'll just snack on this jerky I have," I say, with more snark than I've ever been able to manage.
Welp, there goes that friendship.
Eden Grace comes to town to explain about her venture, The Almalla Foundation, which removes children from war-torn locations, named for Almalla, a child soldier that was one of the first 'rescues'.
There's a protest at the presentation about how these kids are being taken away from their families and familiar environments, and the organization's representatives passionately defend their work -- their families are dead or are likely to sell them into armed service, their "familiar environment" is death and destruction, the organization places them in situations where they can maintain some of their language and customs.
To demonstrate, we're shown what it was like in a transition camp on September 17, 2003.
All of the summer camps have gathered for the war anthem.
The symphony plays in the hatch-shell, and this is the dramatic moment when we know something is going to happen.
Two lines of soldiers come out on stage with their ceremonial flamethrowers pointed at the air over the audiences head, and we all know the bright show is coming.
This is the part that always makes my heart leap into my throat.
The moment comes and the sky over our heads is lit up with fire.
There is a distant rumble and the power goes out.
The flamethrowers can't be turned off, and the throttles break, the flames growing.
The children scatter to the woods and within a half hour, thinking it will protect them, have formed roving violent gangs.
The concert hall is burning and a helicopter crashes into it.
Then a jet, into the refinery we can see in the distance.
There are flames and chaos all over -- all of the power everywhere is out.
Our first step to trying to restore safety is to keep the children in the camp.
We circle the perimeter with a railroad pushcart, but it's too slow.
A glorious sailbarge comes to our rescue.
It's too big to change directions, so you just swap the front for the back when you need to turn around.
The Defense of Marriage Act case has come to the Supreme Court.
I stand in the courtroom, holding the silence.
Not everyone understands what is happening here.
Scalia keeps looking like he's about to talk, but with my bearing and sheer willpower I manage to convince him just enough of the import of this moment that he remains patient.
Prayer flows through me and out of me like a raging flood while everything physical in the room is utterly still.
When I close my eyes, I can still see, but I hear the sound of being underwater in a hurricane.
Is that my pounding heart, or the hint of Amos's mighty stream arriving in this place?
It's both, and they can't be pulled apart.
Three-way firefight.
If everyone hunkers down, who knows what will happen.
Start over and one team leaps the Jersey barriers and throws off the stalemate.
Oh, god, there's so much blood inside a person.
Sometimes it all spills out and sometimes it's like they're just frozen in a painful dream.
The mall is still trying desperately to keep its doors open.
No one walks in the same way they used to.
We spend so much more time thinking about sight lines now.
There's no place to stay out of trouble.
Where did all the people I love get to?
I was sure that there were so many beautiful, kind, generous, wise people.
It's like I was just with them, like we were just talking about important things.
Everyone I meet is under the impression that it's their inhumanity that's enabled them to survive.
It seems so impossible to connect with them.
I am trying to love my muggers.
These are the people I have right now, so these are the people I must love right now.
The feeling is like having swallowed a lozenge too soon and it's trapped in my throat.
They play those dominance games, making jokes to test what amplifies my fear and controls me.
As I work on connecting with them, it's hard to tell exactly where the lines are between treating them justly, protecting my safety, and being their accomplice.
I don't sound the alarm because it would kill me, I don't signal to the cashier, but that means that the alarm doesn't get sounded and the place will be robbed.
I am willing to die for others' lives, but not to protect others' property.
I think.
It's hard to know what I will do if really tested.
I might make excuses.
I don't know how to train for this.
Everyone needs to be ready for these decisions.
They are joking with a knife, testing what amplifies my fear and controls me.
Actually, they are cutting me open.
[Waxtoe] and I are escaping the nightmares by running towards the inbreaking of evil.
The fleeing survivors are clustering where they find one another, in green spaces, led by those few mad prophets who have some insight into what happens when the elder gods reach their cruel thoughts into the waking world.
Most of them have been corrupted and compromised, and are as good as on the side of unspeakability for all the safety they can give.
We go straight toward the harbor where all life has been evacuated down to the potted plants, in hopes that a ring of lifelessness will make earth appear inert and unappetizing.
Like a prey animal that faints.
Maybe we are small enough that we won't be seen by the shadow creatures, the vast insectoid sea monster, the wave of murderous hatred and apathy that spreads outward from the tears in the fabric of sanity.
We huddle in the alleyway out of sight of the great bulbed and eyeless head of the unspeakable thing that rises from the water and huddle together to prepare for the shuddering waves of self-hatred that cascade outward from the opening and closing suckers, moving like gibbering mouths.
I see what is happening to the people elsewhere as they lose the ability to love.
I have a secret weapon: love pours out of me like living water but there's no spring that can run dry in me.
I can't run out.
Life will be different in these small bands of humanity foraging in the bleak aftermath.
We have a tremendous opportunity to build a more just society, and great selective pressure to do so.
On the other hand, there are killer dinosaurs.
Many-player card game of scientific discovery and ethics that explores the timelines branching out from Chekov's visit at the start of all this.
It could have meant something different.
Watching puppies helps me understand what could happen to me if I learn to speak to the visitors.
I could be forever changed in a way that makes it impossible for me to live my old life, to be with the ones I know.
How many of us will there be that walk with me, that give up our humanity to learn about the new technologies, systems of thinking, methods of influence?
I might be completely alone.
Finally there will be peace and justice, but I will have come to see some other justice, some other promise within and not yet, some other reason to cry out with every fiber of my new body, cry out in a newborn way on a frequency I can't now imagine for a more perfect family of the living.
I feel my bones already changing, the whisper of a flawless alien metal, while I watch in wonder at how the puppy learns to work as a pack, the incomprehensibility of an animal instinct that isn't mine, and I discover the delighted bewilderment with which others could love me if they knew me completely.
Everything burned in the summer of 1970.
Teams learned then to work together, roping the cattle demons back behind the barricades to surround them and attack them with anything at hand until the flames went out and our eyes stopped burning with ash for a few short moments, before we had to go forward again.
We learned not to save any of the furniture, any of the books or photographs, any of the bodies of the dead.
We came to understand the sacrifices not as losses: when we placed them in the way of the fire and allowed them to save us, they became a part of us in a way our mere love in a time of safety had never made possible.
The dreams you have are true: irrevocable, consuming violence could erupt at any moment.
It's a miracle that our demons are kept penned in for any length of time.
There is no place that couldn't be at war tomorrow.
This is why you love with such uncontainable intensity, WHY YOU MUST CONTINUE TO: EVERYTHING DEPENDS ON IT.
EVERYTHING DEPENDS ON IT.
No good path ends in your safety.
You will burn with love or in the hell within and not yet.
Both, you will burn both ways, but if you burn with love there is a hope that you can be a firebreak.
Wall-jumping with your riding fish is your one chance to escape the rising tides from garbage dumping.
The large ones that chase you here aren't everywhere anymore.
Oh my gosh, you are my favorite corporealization of shadow forces.
Could it really be you, manifesting here now, even before I've finished my letter from prison?
I can't stop my tail from twitching.
My familiar is embarassing me.
I'm walking Graham through what to do because his credit card number has been scammed off his iPhone He has a corporate credit card number from the card he borrowed from his relatives for the trip, so they'll take good care of him.
I have a picture of the person who runs the ring, but as a ten-year-old white kid with glasses.
Maybe I'll audition, bring an art bike, but not with the kung-fu cut out they're offering for sale to benefit the local comedy haus -- while a kind gesture, kung-fu is played out or racist.
The four page book has advertisements that would be interesting in any other city.
They allow lights here.
At the end of the day, you die, and sometimes you forget.
Here's a diary, not carved into your back.
Sometimes you're so out of yourself that you roll over in bed and can't hold your shape or your gender from moment to moment.
Andy, Sue, and I are watching the junior marching bands practice in Dale Hall Practice is over and it's burrito time.
Sue is consoling Andy, telling him to think of the joy he'll feel watching these kids grow up.
There's a handmade award pinned to the front of his wheelchair about how everyone knows him and he makes every minute count.
Something catches in my lungs and I fall wailing to my knees.
Zimmitti is talking to me about my career.
I'm okay with working more if it compresses the total amount of work I have to do in my life, so that I can spend more time with my family later.
I'm not sure that the promotion I've been offered does that.
We're climbing to a lookout through a maze of stairs.
There she is; I remember from when I was little and she tried to seduce me, but I didn't understand what she was doing.
She has eight surrogate mothers working to provide her with more children.
She recognizes that she knows me, but can't place me, and I manage to escape.
Later I find an anonymized email from her that I hope I can safely ignore.
Unbeknownst to me, I've been automatically re-registered for classes at Eastman all these years.
And at every music theory class, Bob Morris calls my name during attendance and is deeply disappointed.
There's a force that pulls on foes, that can be used to pull down the walls on them and you and bury you all together.
In the backyard, on the trampoline, we talk failed business plans Like the orbital warfare game, where one party buys replica models of satellites and space stations to paint and launches potato gun attacks on those of his neighbors.
It relies too much on the network effects of pervasive adoption.
I wave to Scott from SSSI, who's selling vacuum cleaners.
I don't think he recognizes me.
I did something terrible when I was three that's why we had to go to England, for me to recover, saw the famous 1981 Disney parade.
I completely changed someone's life.
I can't remember the details, and they're not hidden on Dad's laptop.
Low ceilings in bars don't mix with large elaborate riser systems for improv.
Though, large elaborate riser systems comedy with the comedy of smacking your head really hard are.
Man, they play a lot of Billy Joel here.
I worked really hard on my violin and electric guitar licks before the show.
Everyone will know I just picked it up today, but oh well.
We've taken the child architect to the african snows She'll be free of american surveillance here (though speak no evil of them).
All distances are longer than they read in the guidebook, which didn't take into account tracklessness.
Downmountain, they are carelessly firing missiles.
The music is too loud, so be on guard for avalanches.
This portrayal is carefully documented, so as not to orientalize.
We offer non-interfering adventure travel.
In front of us, two women spread out their blankets to picnic, and we watch carefully at a respectful distance to see how it is done.
I finally use one of the thousands of stamps my grandmother sent me.
I didn't want to use them for anything other than writing her, but I never wrote her.
Now that it's clear that she doesn't have much time left, I drop her a quick and vapid note.
I didn't know what to say.
Two days after her death, an overstuffed envelope arrives in the mail.
It's marked "Postage Due" because it exceeds the 32 cent weight limit.
It's the last coherent thing she did.
It's forty pages long.
Some pages are folded like a middle school note; there's a fake quiz in the middle; there's all the advice I will need; there are passages of abject terror.
And there are so many moments where it's clear her impending death has told her something, like the pilot of a doomed plane who understands exactly how the wreckage will be arranged.
You can encase the black stone fingers in a textured plastic and they shine out like skyscrapers.
Minneapolis has all kinds of placeholders like this.
The two nearest places with a copy of the Constitution are here and Oklahoma City, so the field trips alternate every year.
At the end of a long day of driving, Dad and I joke about how the windows roll up.
It's been a while since he's had a Cub Scout in the back seat.
We look up at the skyline and marvel at how much it looks like the patterns of on and off lights that only a crowd can conspire to.
See how closely the sales of the Boston Candy Company correlate with the overall sales of ribbon candy?
It's a bellwether for us, because all our products are like that: a little old-fashioned, comforting, simple but a little fancy.
You'll notice a sharp decline where a particular generation grows old enough that other people choose their meals again -- hospitals and nursing homes don't buy ribbon candy.
Then a peak several years after that as those with fond childhood memories of visiting their grandchildren and eating ribbon candy grow up and have candy jars of their own.
Then that market disappears when the candy of their grandparents begins to remind them too much of their own mortality.
You'll see another pattern in our shops in predominantly black neighborhoods.
Soon after we became a retailer in addition to the manufacturing business we've had since 1871, the rising affluence of the black community led to an increased interest in gourmet candies.
You'll notice, however, that that interest falls off a few years later, as ribbon candy is perceived as a white treat, and it becomes less socially unacceptable for African-Americans to be seen with stereotypically white foods.
Sales wax and wane as the risk of being labelled a race traitor rises and falls.
You're staring at that metal can, the deep green can of Vermont Cocoa.
See how it makes you think you had that cocoa at your grandmother's house?
You never did -- that product is only two years old.
The thick grass and great granite boulders make this a most unusual spot for a driving range in the round.
We don't expect to get any of the balls back.
There's none of the thrill of aiming your drives at the kid in the cart recycling the balls.
What there is, is the local scene, guys that come here for decades.
Some just keep on with the same routine every time, never really getting any better, every few years adding one more to the number of beers they have when they come.
But there's this school of thought that prefers tossing the ball in the air before the swing -- teeless golf -- and I'm sure some of those guys are the best in the world at that.
You can't play ricochet golf anywhere else -- you just don't have the boulders we have up here.
When your loneliness goes out of your body again, you'll notice why it comes for such a brief stay with such intensity.
It has a ten foot wingspan.
It dives from a mile up, pointed at your soft innards.
It carries replacement organs in its talons.
It is a master surgeon, and immediately after it utterly eviscerates you, it begins to sew you back together with a confused jumble of the parts of other peoples' kind bodies.
And then it leaves through your back, and there is a quick, imaginary tearing, and it begins to circle slowly up again on the warm currents, waiting for the next sign of weakness.
Gonzo's life is being ruined by an addiction to sugary snacks.
When he detoxes, he becomes Jeff Sachs.
The 3n+1 problem.
Land bridges from Germany to Scandanavia appear in low tides.
But the U.K.
is colder, so the water is risen.
The Thames is too high.
Most of the country will need to be evacuated.
You can tough it out when it's 45 degrees, but at 20, frostbite and hypothermia are more likely.
There's a pipeline that will have to go through Germany to supply Poland and the rest of Eastern Europe, now that the north sea is shallower.
I have a kinesthetic sense of the contours of the earth: I feel these changes like a touch.
I either know that I am dreaming, or that I have a place, so the evacuations are fascinating movements of creatures.
The filth and disorder and heartbreak does not move me.
I'm traveling with a robot addicted to injecting the simplest of feelings, and my passport is made from a tree that is still standing.
Dangerous, especially since I'm unsure that I've paid taxes properly -- I paid none on reimbursements from work for the rockets I sent up, when Nick Garner and I were competing for a low-atmosphere tightrope walking marionette.
The contest seems so far away.
I'd been practicing jamming the buttons.
You're lucky you didn't ever fall over the glass in the central atrium.
That you've got this far is all just luck.
Going over and over and over the hostage video, trying to read what the captured Christian Peacemakers are lip-synching.
Then I'm in the SAS, after the SAS have given up their weapons, except for the cool-looking ones.
I'm evacuating orphans from a war zone in a shopping cart, and there are no friendlies in a twenty-mile radius.
Bombs fall on the just and the unjust alike.
Students' grades improve in weeks where it's just in-class, no homework.
But when it's just a test on Monday, teachers have a tendency to come to school smashed.
There's a military loan that will expire next year.
Dad needs to take care of the details for me.
Hes at the reserve desk, ordering up some Many Patinkin and a history of how the Star Wars casting went when it was discovered truly how many Hollywood couples were incapable of love.
We're in one of those moods where we have to sing everything.
That annoys the recruiter, who thinks singing is a sign of faggery.
bon jeunesse Adjectival agreement is a thing of the past.
The Colorado Cardinals vs.
the Blue Team in Outdoor Football.
Only the players' parents would watch a game this disorganized.
People cower and do not avoid the impending explosions.
At halftime, the gloves come off the underworld.
Someone summons fountains of grey and hoops to jump through.
You're chasing after the thought that was just in your head as if it were your new love.
Something in French.
Apartment buildings, concrete.
What you do with water bottles left around, that are someone's.
Take offense at my interruption because...
participation in the international rankings based on grades, a neat table of your near-excellence.
Up-to-the minute, after every homework paper marked, weighted based on the quality of the education, so that the limits on the upward mobility of the poor are finally explicit.
I would have worked harder under this system.
Or, I would have snapped, spectacularly and maybe violently.
Everyone is a character, meaning their voice and manner are circumscribed and their emotions are narrowed from the full human range.
This in order that one may be distinct from the next, so that we can tell us apart (read: cleave the ideas of us apart) cleanly.
Who our neighbours are: they are purposefully placed beside us, for contrast or comparison, sometimes just the juxtaposition of color, orange by yellow.
Andy's had surgery and could potentially walk short distances with crutches and braces, but muscles are still weak.
With me holding him, he takes several crutch hops.
CBGB's is also a B&B.
It's a cold weekend.
Mike is explaining something to his parents.
I hope he isn't high.
There are football games, too.
I should go to some of the nursery's events, since these people are to be my housemates.
There is an excellent DJ who might own the place whose music I can't hear, though I deduct it must be in the air.
Strange devices.
They are pulleys for extracting silver.
This is about the ends of movies We resolve how best to start "rob the man" with two in the field and a weaker batter, if the terrain is uneven and leafy.
Up to the sun with a plastic paper gun through the door of mortality reality fun.
Truth in the knave wears a plastic paper wave tricky dumb sticky thumb in the parody land.
Gluuuuuuuuuuue.
Gluuuuuuuuue.
To keep us together, forever, forever, forever.
Also, R.E.M.
You try to shout it, but you're asleep.
Where the vocal cords aren't.
You were collecting figments in the abbey when two of them had the tickets from Regal, the fake free ticket book, and when you put them together, you're taken over by a demon of saying dumb and obscene things.
This is how you shout through it, with a music of white freestyle joy.
Cattails on top of cattails on top of cattails, until their shadows break and shimmer.
When super people team up, battles become much easier.
We watch each others' back, and reduce the risk of injury.
But simple matters, like cutting cake, devolve into endless negotiation.
Is it really worth compromising on cake?
Work wants me to upgrade to a GeForce FX 98000.
Good thing the old card's edible.
Ungoliant totally tears up the speed hockey circuit.
It's easy to goal-tend when you have the form of a twenty-foot-long spider.
Zweige can speak to the other famous people he knows, but I know Holfstad as well as he.
I work in his musical laboratory, after all.
I'm always meeting people I'm embarrassed by in bookstores.
They're doing great things, and here I am.
Well, in a rock band, that's well enough.
And doing behavioral experiments, with alien life.
Though that's just for show, as they're deterministic state machines that I've finished mapping.
Visitors to the area are often confused by other large, green statues that are not Liberty.
That's what cities are all about: confusing multiples of what you're looking for.
Faces who don't belong to the people you know with them trick you into thinking you recognize something.
One day looks like another enough that you're tricked into thinking you understand it.
Many statue, much gematria.
You have an alphabet, so you think you understand language.
We've pulled samples from the sand -- there are indications that the findings determine a qaballistic requiem.
One movement in this form is composed of elkreion, short moments corresponding to Hebrew letters, progressing around a set cycle of scales.
They thought it meant something other than the sound of it.
We kiss, thinking it means something other than the fact of it.
Oh, how cute humans are, so much more mistaken than the alien life.
Let's play at ruining each other.
What an opportunity, to study Tookland, the whale towns.
Families of two to three dozen live in each whale, tightly bunched in the mid depths for warmth, their skin pale and glistening, exfoliated from the digestive juices.
We aim to discover how they evacuate when their housing dies.
He would have liked to do the work among the Nunavut (don't you mean Inuit?), but here is where the funding is, and we follow it like a current of krill.
The promoter for Guster is a Took, which explains their aversion to albums with a single theme.
It's problematic to have people believe that they've figured out what you are.
Best to make obvious all of your contradictions at each moment.
So the Tooks' music is a cacophonous glory, compelled by feelings not often expressed.
The whales are readied for space.
But we aren't cautious enough among the asteroidal paradise habitats.
As the repulsor field sends one into an unstable orbit, the call goes out for a flea market.
When we go down, exchange everything we own.
The archaeologists that uncover us from the lava bed won't invade our privacy if we switch all our artifacts.
No matter how long the streets stretch, we have to get these kids to school.
Look at this map -- Alaska is claimed by three people, chopped into huge squares, just because they were there first.
And now large parts of the population pay rent to them.
How can you possibly believe that opportunity is equal?
Where are your eyes?
At a timeout, the game stops to play the history of the gods.
Rain for weeks has been caused in the forest, washing away all food and water for the settlers.
The natives have reserves, but more fear to begin with.
Those gods win that induce the greatest terror and despair.
Sing, to delay the game.
Sing into their faces and dare them to crush you.
That's what Psalm 42 is: a penalty flag against Jehovah for screwing over his chosen people again.
Repeat it with me until a safety is inevitable.
Matt Joyce has taken over the marching band of resistance -- we are to play the national anthem, and to curse the proceedings, he sings every verse.
There are thousands of them.
Sophia Ndesc, we've brought you a bonnet and endives as real people do, people who remember you.
Appropriation runs rampant.
It's how the millions speak to one another when one-to-one is distant.
"Onge" is the name of the sense that I know something about you that shouldn't be readily apparent.
The tribes have finally decided to allow in those whites that pay.
Ladybird Johnson, 6'4", always walks quickly.
Icy weather.
Recipe for disaster.
What does this have to do with what her sister did to her in writing "Little Women"?
That's history for you.
The red carpet is slick as a mirror.
Johnson slides, remains upright as her leg snaps.
Someone comes out immediately to try and support her, but he ends up putting part of his weight on her -- bad!
She makes her way into the limo herself.
The brilliance of the cameraperson keeps watching the aides.
A roomful of assistants grab retractable canes, and swear loudly when they're not the one that saved the day.
How could you not have heard of the female punk duo that Ladybird would have become, if nothing had happened in the 60's, if she and her sister had had a chance to grow in their musical abilities?
Haven't you heard any music?
Someone dropped a pointer to the Edwin R.
Murrow Archive of Stuff.
So much goodness in it.
You know in the U.K., on Christmas Eve, they show it to schoolchildren, the Revised and Expanded Powers of Ten.
From Determinate Matter out to Everything.
Snap your fingers out to everything.
There's an apparently abandoned house that we just sit in, waiting for the train.
The owner comes home -- perhaps it would be best if we fixed it up for him.
Even if we miss the train.
Murrow!
Murrow!
We love you!
The Carlsbad, CA Friends' Meeting is small, but noisy, with a few familiar faces.
There's an impulse, travelling around the room, to sing a verse of "How Can I Keep From Singing?"
One old man sings out of tempo, and a member of Ministry & Counsel stands to chide him: "Fred, I think it would be good if we sang so that people could sing along."
Only some of us sing along.
Someone else stands and says, "What are you, a bunch of hireling ministers, making each other sing in time?
You listen, not sing along!"
But the singing keeps going.
I can feel the tension in the room rise.
I feel moved to speak, but I'm worried it's anger and not the Spirit, so I sit on it until I'm sure my heart will explode.
I finally stand, but I can't hear what I'm saying.
Thinking I'm speaking too softly, I talk louder, but the people begin covering their ears and the walls begin to rattle.
But to my own ears, it's complete silence.
I wonder what I'm saying?
There's a large dragonfly, colored like a peacock and folded like an origami masterwork.
To survive, it must poke a tiny hole all the way through someone's arm.
How would anyone allow this if it wasn't so beautiful?
Movie: spinning, sad.
Cigarette voice.
Nicknames.
Cafeterias.
Doctor's visits.
Invasion; robot armor.
Bazooka and its green reticule.
Space platform.
Reform is needed: the judges shouldn't be the heroes.
When Ice Scalia is injured holding off a science experiment on the 33rd circuit, the judges of the 77th replace him.
Nomination is complicated, because there are trade-offs.
Ice Scalia, for instance, can take and deal large amounts of pain.
But on the bench, he is like a small child.
When I transform, important objects are absorbed into me.
My trumpet, for instance.
I am at the courthouse looking for it.
The Ginsbergenator carts around a train of celli.
Out in the battlezone, an ARG is coalescing.
It is difficult to tell if it is for advertising purposes, or if it requires a judicial counter-strike.
Delegate Polya to solve it, sadly -- you would have liked the challenge.
[Laugher] says: of course Islam is inherently evil.
Who is she trying to fool?
But she keeps going, blaming Arabs for the infestations, advocating carpet bombing.
There's no sincerity in her voice, but I can't stop her.
Why does she want me to hate her?
I can't -- she knows I can't.
Start over from a given spot until you're satisfied with the result.
Deciding when to move on is heartbreaking -- giving up the undo is so hard.
In the end, she has to launch herself at me in a frenzy of claws and teeth.
I am still and therefore unaffected.
Of course you'll be pulled along by the river.
The graves at Pydoic call you back.
The others want to travel like you do.
Soj Bafonet, have you forgot the death speech already?
Young men empty their rooms, to swap places, carefully recording who they are so that they will come back correctly.
Joe's missing the diamond in his triangle bulb.
You find the commendation that fits inside, but the stone is still in the carpet.
You think.
It's hard to keep things straight with the Yulpoi inte capote detuoic finol.
Watch your words.
There's a marine on the roof next door with a boom mike.
But I need to know whether [Cinephile] really did it -- it would explain things.
First the Ramblers went through, clogging the drains of Atlanta.
When the inevitable flood came, what happened?
Traumatized nerd-girl tells me she saw it all.
But there are rules against being comforting.
I lay a hand on the air behind her shoulder.
"We have to wash it away," says [Cinephile], again.
It almost isn't English anymore.
There's a mantra about to emerge from the words, like a giant monster from a defeated monster on a sentai show.
He's opening the reservoirs, puncturing the water tanks, straining to turn the great wheels attached to every valve.
Pour on water, pour on water, look out, look out, fire fire fire fire, pour on water pour on water pour on water pour on water look out lookoutfirefirefirefirepouronwaterpouronwater, pouronwaterpouronwaterlookoutlookoutfirefirefirefirepouronwaterpouronwater Those beaten in the school hallways often have their deadlines extended.
That you don't know them is fine -- there's a sufficiency of little kids sewing quilts for them, depicting the act in a wide range of art styles.
Though you can see the topic in the air in front of you, you never put it on the page to hand it in.
It's not that you'll fail that you mind, it's that it won't get written.
Those who know, sit in the back, tell you "Someone else will write it, if it wants to be written."
You take responsibility, though the people around you are leaving out critical parts of their sentences, and beginning to stare.
For one project, we called it Meritreaea; for the second, Pringolesh.
A conceit that conjures business partners into existence.
"It's very German; I like that," says the potential investor on the second day, when we ply him with a table that plays music according to the seasons, like the fiction.
Bach repeats in senseless variation.
You're wearing yesterday's clothes, on the inside.
This is the sort of lecture series that crowds the sidewalks.
If you're here for a class, hold hands, so we can see the social creatures that come into temporary being.
Who is it you travel into your dreams to see?
You would do well to remember he's now an instrument of your subconscious -- true visitation remains impossible.
Talking, my family and I realize we each thought we were hallucinating, but the times we took Andy out to do things line up.
We take detailed notes and run a series of experiments to make sure that things line up and it's real.
We watch CCD on TV near the concession stand and go simultaneous bowling.
I tell my sister it must be a dream, but she tells me I'm a pessimist.
"Whose dream would it be, anyway," she asks.
Well, you don't work at the concession stand, so it's not yours!
I break out into song: "You're not even real" and soon the whole fake world has joined me, old people throwing off their walkers and canes to dance.
Announcements: the church has voted to join the SEA network -- it's not a big deal, just if a bunch of folks want to get together to talk about how to cook for three hundred, we can do that.
The pastor preaches from the game I worked on, "Liddy": he's talking about how you need to have a balanced force within the individual members of your regiment, not just balance among the regiment.
You can't have a guy that's just on the walkie-talkie, you know.
People refuse to sing the words "Atlanta" or "Georgia."
This isn't the South, though people mistake us for it.
Afterwards, we talk about his piano lesson with Kobalevsky.
She refused to stop playing, even where there were rests in the music.
[Owwch] was there afterwards; she'd been watching the kids.
I leap into her arms and we spin around fast.
She throws me and I roll, and I say hello to some children.
As I'm talking, I turn and see she's collapsed, with foam trailing from her mouth.
If I turn her right, I can make her breathe.
She vomits.
I have to clear it, but turn her so she can still breathe.
She's not breathing.
She's trying to breathe, but I haven't cleared the airway.
Someone runs over and opens her back, begins pumping air in.
"I don't know what I did," I can't stop saying.
She had her lungs replaced with a plastic blue compressible tube -- it was like that forever, but she never told me about it.
No one tells me anything like that.
The mountain further away.
It remembers you in permafrost, from the round trip.
[Laugher] says go.
Mimbe courts your mother.
He asks you for her hand, because her first husband and her father are dead.
His argument is in an old-fashioned briefcase that overflows with poetry.
Longing culled from the variables of deprecated software.
There are two months before the chronology permits return -- we can't avoid talking to the tribes, or we'll starve.
They speak English.
This should be impossible.
You be "Nelson Riddle."
I'll be "Admiral Rockefeller."
Pretend to be bankers, or salesmen, quick.
But they're second-generation and not from the timestream at all -- though they don't know it.
In 1979, the search goes out: to find the nation's averagest boy.
The judges, editors of Time-Life, are led to Billerica by Jack Sperling, 14-year-old holder of seventeen world records, from cereal eating to underwater and overwater breath holding.
Jack Sperling is not in the running.
But there, at a bus station, bouncing a ball against a brick wall, is Jack's good friend Donnie Darko [no relation], soon to be crowned nation's averagest boy.
Donnie is interviewed through a swinging screen door.
He collects baseball cards, and wants to be an astronaut.
His feeling on most issues is "I dunno."
He has a hidden talent for landscaping that no one will ever discover.
He can follow current trends and sense where gardens will be planted -- when he plays tag, he often loses because he is avoiding trees that haven't grown in yet.
After his profile in Time-Life, things change for Donnie.
He becomes a public speaker, at first at Rotary Club meetings and clam chowder fundraisers, by virtue of his crown.
Then, the not-good-at-spelling but insightful editor of the Merrimack New Christian Sentinel gets ambitious and decides to branch out from local news to detailed coverage of turmoil in Africa.
He sends Donnie.
Donnie returns six foot four and thin as a rail, three years later.
He's fifteen, but he has to go back to the eighth grade because he can't get schooling credit for his time as an international correspondent.
He begins to volunteer his time as a public defender in candy bar stealing and vandalism cases.
He's very good.
Principal Neblick is worried about his legacy.
Every day he walks over a hill named for the old principal, and crosses a highway named for the principal before that.
Even the minor principals have classrooms named for them.
The townspeople believe there might be an auditorium in retirement with Neblick's name on it, but they don't know the whole story.
Neblick came to power as a result of his stories about the war -- he was a fighter pilot who downed a dozen enemy planes.
He was shot down twice, once just over enemy lines, but escaped the war with nothing more than a few broken bones and a chip off the end of his right ring finger.
Once, a picture of him is taken for the paper, and his tie is blown back in the wind.
The back of his tie clip is revealed -- sewn on to it is Neblick's rank badge from the Luftwaffe.
He never did say which side he flew for, but the townsfolk aren't very happy.
Neblick's tried for treason.
This will be Donnie's toughest case yet.
I know exactly how the control scheme would work for juggling.
Growlf would be on the verge of the high score list.
The level selection looks like you're going up, though the river flows from the mountains to the fens: it's just a metaphor.
Apologize!
Apologize.
A children's book, told in rhyme, but as long and complicated as Judy Blume.
Boy, mother, father, grandmother.
At day camp, boy clogs the toilet and doesn't tell anyone.
It overflows, and it's on the top of the hill, and everyone has to leave early.
There's lots of damages.
His parents are upset, but also weird, because his mother's sick.
She needs special chemo food from the grocery store.
He hasn't seen his grandmother in a while; dad's mom.
Dad doesn't talk about it much.
She's found out that mom's sick, and moves in, and it's hard.
Dad and boy have this bonding thing: dad is really into birds, and boy likes them too.
But now grandmother is always correcting dad and boy about the right latin names (dad just makes up funny ones).
It's important to dad that boy gets dad's birding equipment when he dies.
Mom tips over something and starts a fire, which burns a room of the house.
Grandmother is mad, but weak, and threatens to die on everyone.
Everyone trips on things: that's the moral.
[Beach] and [Loyal] aren't together anymore, but I run into them both at the same time in the new facilities.
They shouldn't be in the same place.
[Beach] is trying to tell me without [Loyal] hearing: that she's found out she's infertile.
It's hard to see [Loyal] like this.
Late-night bussing; architecture.
So many e-mails -- all my projects come to fruition at once, it seems like.
Lak Schmee Singh has sent me a video of the choreography the student did to our former collaboration: it kind of sucks.
But people are smiling, and young are making out with old on the dance floor.
Andy's gathering his thoughts to be recorded.
But when he speaks them, it's so hard to understand and write them down.
What a house: the fruit rolls through a hole in the wall.
Don't enjoy too much what isn't yours, and nothing is.
Or do enjoy it, thumbing your nose at the owners.
I'm not a part of the comic duo, but maybe there's a role for me.
The joke is: he thinks he's in a styrofoam suit, but really it's just nudity.
It takes a long time to paint on the texture digitally in post-production, and it still looks like cel-shading.
They work me hard, and I love it.
I'm moving everything.
It's all out on the street.
Someone asks if they can have my photographs.
Sure, why not.
An acquaintance walks by that didn't know I was leaving.
We chat briefly.
She raves about the period costume/novelty/leather shop I'm in front of; I hadn't really noticed because the entrance is discreet and it looked a bit sketchy, so I filtered it out.
There, in the window, are wax statues of people dear to me that I haven't seen in a long time, in their new lives.
Dave Stansel, Marc Liberatore, Sarah Bixby, Beth Meyers, Meghan Durstine.
I go inside to meet the proprietor.
We have a shouting conversation, since she's downstairs in the employees-only section, about how I know all these people she knows too.
Then we're out of things to say.
I buy some rubbing alcohol for an itch I have.
When I get back to my stuff on the sidewalk and open it up, it turns out to be used.
A cougar and grizzly, outside my Volvo.
Behaving unpredictably.
DON'T OPEN THE DOOR!
Sorting comics.
Looking up a cinematography internship.
In a painting, you look at (a) what you want (b) what you want to be.
The former is materialism.
The latter is known as the slut complex.
Billy Joel introduced the etiology in his groundbreaking analysis of his father's altered photographs of featureless black spheres embedded in everyday life, which sequence I have done my best to carry to its logical conclusions.
We dare them, dare them!, to try to shut us down.
Anywhere with an internet connection, art cannot be stopped.
Why is it I'd never visited the cafeteria where most of the black students went, before now?
They charge higher prices for identical items, and you have to get a key to use the public restroom.
Someone mentions a quote I've heard before, in response.
It's by a man who elaborately escaped from his hometown and left his wife and children.
He wrote poetry in which he was two people: his old, responsible, social self, and a madman who thought himself a shaman.
How would you bring the Barbie Dreamhouse Memorial in line with neo-modernist dicta?
Pave inscriptions, where they appear.
Remove some-to-most gold.
Frilly detailing is out.
Replace with a clean marble.
Ironwork is the new columnry.
This is easy.
But finding the right new pink?
Oh, god.
Look closely at the shape of a complicated "r".
The larger curves tell you exactly what the smaller curves will be like.
Trace it: see?
You think the wolves don't do what they're supposed to, but in fact it works exactly as planned.
They tear off every bit of hide from the kill.
The issue is, combat is greater risk than the experience system accounts for.
And wolves far away learn from each other.
From the most primitive materials, a trivial pursuit game may be constructed.
Sometimes the issue is to lose your pieces, travelling to the reverse side of the board to win.
There are games like this inside every game; most have been lost to time, because, frankly, they are too complicated.
You don't want the cable company to come through again, to use your home as a base for a documentary on your brother.
Remember last time, when they showed a long clip of the day he wore an afro, without mentioning it was actually halloween and you didn't dress him that way all the time?
People will tell you you're doing it all wrong, or they'll express their concern over and over again.
They can't do anything; their solicitousness just keeps you from doing anything that gives you any space.
You need your distance, you need an outside life for strength, so you don't tell people anything about him.
People forget the main reason humans domesticated dogs, which is: you don't really have to take care of them.
Back in the day, they'd just poop in the woods, and if anyone found the poop, it'd be completely dried -- even bits of pork in it to attract animals you wanted to hunt.
You'd let them wander outside the huts and they'd stay there, proud and unwhining.
Cities are cruelty to them.
They become pathologically needy.
Be fearful of the day when they discover the back-to-nature movement.
One day, they'll learn from the wolves and side with the snakes, untameable and dangerous to children.
This, duplicitous or sincere, is how it is with everything: you have to read the outside signs.
It's time to review our time in Rochester, says Lewis in his column.
Remember the way things used to click by on the conveyor belts: newspapers out of order, bits of concrete, skeletons hidden under complicated diagrams, misinformation about the terrorist attacks.
Tell us, Lewis, exactly what special insights different flavors of transgendered people grant us, and when they're just making things up.
Somewhere in the stack of old issues is the advice I loved so much.
"You're the sort of person who should buy land around here and start a farm."
Is it coincidence that so many people tell me this?
I notice how rocky the ground is, how steep the climb is, as I make my way blindly up into the back woods.
People don't understand that I don't have the capital.
I imagine what this path will be like when winter comes back.
When I walked down to get to market, the snow would be too deep to know if I was walking over the path.
Spring would come, and I'd see where I'd been, and how far it was from what I meant.
How small a farm could I have and survive?
What about if I grew illegal things?
The land might be cheap enough closer to the bayou.
I arrive and say hello to the tagged and numbered alligator, the biggest predator around.
Sasha has spent almost all of her time here over the last five years, tracking number four's every movement and meal in colored pencils on tracing paper.
Sometimes she gets frustrated at how much time it takes, and chucks her pencils with such force that they're completely buried in the mud.
But something about this job speaks to her and makes her feel filled with purpose.
I ask her what it is about the alligators that she loves so much.
She says something brief and beautiful about what they tell us about earlier geologic eras, and what it tells us about ourselves to understand how the top of the food chain succeeds or fails, and the neat fact: the warm side of the nest turns male and the cold side female.
She could talk for hours about alligators, but she gives a short answer, because she's so sick of me asking her questions like this.
She says: "What's wrong with you that you want to know all these things about me?
If I wanted a conversation, we'd be having a conversation, and you wouldn't be interviewing me all the time.
Understanding me doesn't have any healing properties; there's no secret magic in me."
Which is where she's wrong, but I'm no closer to uncovering it.
Because it's somewhere in how everything fits together.
If you took any of a dozen keystone memories from her, she'd be just another woman.
Over the years, enough of her has rubbed off onto number four that I don't have to bother her anymore to understand.
His jaws open wide and I lower myself inside.
He dives underwater.
By the time we cross the ocean, I'll have figured out the prophecy I'm supposed to deliver.
I'll sing it out to the aimless cities like a barnfull of contradancing Sufis.
Spin so fast you crack and the golden sun shines out.
I could have gotten away, and gone forever in that zeppelin.
But no, they've spotted me and put out an APB.
The word gets to my parents, who follow.
Theirs carries more gasoline: I won't get away.
The archive, here it is.
Millions of sound samples.
The other kids applying for this gig admit they're johnny-come-latelies.
This is so me.
We're where we're not supposed to be, in the hospital, watching the victory of old-fashioned technology: premature babies bond to miniature pigs, who watch over them better than any doctor could.
Chris and Stranger go deeper into the hospital; I have all my stuff and can't follow.
They make fun of me with a joke map that's my conception of the world.
Boston stretches out to the Mississippi River.
I talk to a man who moved archaeological finds to museums.
"Oh, the treasures I've ruined: run over in a Jeep.
Tripped over.
Accidentally peed on.
The papyri I've used for scrap paper.
The vases I've knocked over in the dark."
He carries a thousand historians' regrets in his poor heart.
He's going under the knife to remove it -- it's worth the risk, to be free of the stomach clench that comes over you when you don't expect it and the sudden urge to cry in the subway.
The animals that claw at your mind.
Security is here.
I know my rights!
I go limp.
I don't answer questions.
"You're just an idiot hippie," the guard says, lifts me forcibly and tosses me into his observation elevator.
Turns out I have no rights after all.
I'm trying to apply for a job with the airline, but they don't speak English very well.
They think I'm already working for them and print me a copy of someone else's paycheck.
I try to correct them and they ask for my ID.
They think I'm impersonating the other employee, and trying to steal their paycheck.
I'm very patient with them, and they stop yelling eventually.
I think that I finally have successfully communicated things to them.
I can't understand why they're asking me to get on the next plane, but I do.
I'm in back with the other workers.
They're friendly: one relays her story about similar communication barriers.
I help rearrange the chairs for the dinner after we reach a crusing altitude.
Yum!
The best part is, I can get to visit all these different places, now that they've hired me.
Wait, have they hired me?
Maybe I just shouldn't ask.
Well, it might not really be like visiting lots of different places, since I might just get to stay a moment.
Like when I went to Switzerland.
Hold on, I went to Switzerland?
Just for a moment.
Janelle's wealthy friend had a deal from his credit card company and he took us both on a whim.
It was uncomfortable for me because I had two dollars on me, and no francs, and we were eating in ridiculously expensive restaurants.
That was a weird weekend.
I brought Monopoly, but lots of pieces were missing and there was the yellow card I had drawn when I was five or six to replace a lost Reading Railroad.
"Good thing I brought my set," someone says, as their personal assistant hands them a pristine board.
They had jump glasses, too, there.
I could never get jump glasses to work properly.
I had to assemble my own, and I was worried I'd break them, because they cost more than two dollars and I couldn't pay for a replacement.
Something was wrong with the polarization that lets you experience SpidermanDreamhunt in 3D.
But you could still jump okay, a somersaulting experience where if you jump again at the top of your arc, you jump non-somersaulting, but as if there was a second ground there.
Like Ninja Gaiden, but without having to be a ninja, which could get you into trouble.
"Ninjas have kind of a hard life," I remind someone at the next table.
"Yeah, I guess."
I guess?
She's obviously never been a ninja.
I mean, I'm white, too, but at least I'm somewhat sensitive to ninja issues, and I really listen to my ninja friends.
I know how to do this, the thing with the jump glasses, so I can help teach the rich people.
I'm glad I can do something for them.
An idea!
I could get paid to do this for them!
I could be their personal jump glasses trainer.
I start to sell the idea, but they get furious: we're in a no-commerce zone.
"What kind of a person are you?
Do you hit people in public?
Do you pick your nose!?"
"Well, once in a while, if I have a really annoying, dried-up booger," I admit.
They're going to maroon me here.
Oh, well, Switzerland's not such a bad place to be stuck in.
But I only have two dollars, so I'll need a job.
Maybe the airlines?
Bob Antonelli's trying to throw it in-bounds but we keep kicking it up the sidelines and out.
Finally, he calls "time toss" and runs onto the field with it balanced on his head.
We score.
[before] It's the five of us, the Jennings family -- we're trapped in the mid-nineteenth century.
The thing about the mid-nineteenth century is, everyone keeps a diary.
People seem to fall from great heights on a regular basis, especially explorers.
Sue's taking being trapped in time the hardest.
The rest of us are surprisingly good natured about the whole thing.
Even though Andy was planning a marriage, he says G.
I.
Capella would have left him anyway, soon enough.
When we went to New York, Sue found this neat instrument made from plumbing.
I regret not looking through the attic, but I was doing other things.
I can't remember what, no matter how hard I think.
Was I just asleep?
I sleep too much, that's for sure.
I need to study how Leonardo da Vinci did it.
When we fly on an airplane, we have to be sure no-one sees us: airplanes haven't been invented yet.
We're travelling to the enclave, where we've sent back people who died before our time journey.
We're outside a strange house, where Mom will grow up instead.
There's a t-shirt hanging on the line, a union-organizing slogan from Mexico: she'll wear it for the next twenty-five years, through three pregnancies.
I remember when she finally threw it out.
Giving up the people you've lost for the people you have isn't as good a trade as it feels like.
A middle installment of Stewart Brand's serial about the future: A journalist chatters idly to his five-year-old nephew, complaining about the false security alarms.
They're in an emergency treatment ward.
The nephew's just in for an ear infection -- no health insurance.
Nephew wants the special part of these visits: riding backwards in the stroller.
But the journalist is trying to find out more about the child of a group of refugees from Charybdis.
Another false terrorist alarm is called, and the hospital is evacuated.
The hospital personnel need to dispose of the dead refugees, and ship the live ones out because they won't clear immigration.
The bodies can't go into organic matter recycling because they might be contaminated.
So they're loaded into tiny pods, the live ones to be shipped back to war-torn Charybdis, and the dead ones to the uninhabitable part of the surface, where only partial terraformation has been completed.
Journalist and nephew are on the way to the transfer station.
The theme music for terrorist alarms is playing.
The journalist is complaining about it, but it's effective for most: it makes the people feel as if they're doing something noble and useful, that the evacuation is warranted, that by running, they're fighting evil.
Journalist gives nephew back to journalist's sister.
A representative of the shipping companies arrives, the one the journalist has arranged an interview with, about their financial interest in the war and allegations of discriminatory hiring practices.
The representative is black: in case footage is used, the white journalist will look foolish calling the black representative's company discriminatory.
They go to an isolated spot.
The representative has two hefty minders.
"Aren't you going to take notes?"
they ask.
"Pencil, paper?"
The journalist smells trouble.
They're going to try to confiscate his notes.
He keeps them as audio recordings in his PDA.
He tells them so, and the toughs try to take it from him.
"No!!
If it leaves my bio-signature, it will explode!"
The toughs give it back.
This might have been a lie.
"It was the only way to keep my footage when I was covering the Moon War -- both sides wanted no record of how horrible it really was."
The representative is confused.
"You didn't just send a remote to the Moon War?"
The journalist didn't.
He had gone in-body.
"There's something...
when something so horrible...
people need to know that it's real."
If the journalist had been paying closer attention to the transfer station traffic, he might have found a story no one found for another hundred years.
On the partially terraformed part of Mars, the bodies are delivered, and dumped out.
A small child is still breathing: a live refugee was mistaken for dead.
Horror: they're all alive, though not for long.
The shipments must have been mixed up.
The thing is, in their last ten minutes, nothing changes.
Couples that argue all the time blame each other.
The power-hungry try to get elected leader.
Old men sigh and tell rambling stories that this reminds them of.
Small children cry because their parents are crying.
Older children run around wildly, giggling and throwing red sand at each other.
[recurring fever dreams] I open the door to my suite.
She's in the kitchen, already looking at me, her pupils strangely dilated.
She shoots me in the chest.
I open the door to my suite.
She spins quickly, awkwardly, to face me.
I have a stroke.
I wake up and open my bedroom door.
Her back is to me.
She's cooking scrambled eggs.
She's startled by the sound of the door opening.
A second gravity pulls me backwards.
I crash through the plate glass window.
I'm paralyzed by the fall.
A pride of lions arrives, begins to feed on me.
I have my hand on the doorknob to my suite, but it turns and opens.
She was just leaving, and is shocked to see me.
I walk through her.
She turns to look at where I would be, but sees nothing.
She shakes her head to clear it, and walks away.
I wake up and open my bedroom door.
Behind it is another door.
It can't be opened.
She's screaming for help on the other side.
I get a running start to break the door down, and charge, head first.
My skull cracks on the door, and I collapse.
I open the door to my suite, and there she is, in the kitchen, changing.
I try to leave without being noticed, but she spots me and calls the police, who arrive immediately and beat me to death.
I'm taking a very difficult standardized test.
I'm concentrating so hard that it takes me several minutes to feel the metal of the gun against my forehead.
She forces me to fill in the answers to the supplemental questions in such a way that I'm diagnosed with schizophrenia.
As I fill in the answers, they come true.
I become worried that my thoughts are being broadcast.
I can't stop screaming.
I can't stop apologizing that my thoughts are crowding out everyone else's.
I have to be euthanized.
I touch the doorknob to my suite, but it's too hot to turn.
The door explodes outward.
There she is, all fire and wind, with glorious wings.
She has come to announce my death.
My heart stops beating.
I wake up and open my bedroom door.
She's right outside it, smiling at me.
A second gravity pulls me backwards.
I crash through the plate glass window.
It's only a short drop.
I'm lying in the wet grass with shards of glass everywhere in me.
My digestive tract suddenly fills with bleach, and I begin to vomit blood.
We're in my kitchen.
She's crying out from the pain.
The tips of fresh bones are growing through her shoulder blades, deep red blood staining her t-shirt.
I go to get her some aspirin.
When I return, the claws at the tips of her new wings reach out for my face and rake my eyes until I'm blind.
"I didn't mean it," she says, but it wouldn't have happened if she hadn't had the subconscious impulse to kill me.
I'm taking a very difficult standardized test.
When I become aware of her gun against my forehead, I become slightly less substantial.
She guides the gun into my brain until it is completely inside, pointed forward, right behind my forehead.
If I make eye contact with anyone, the gun will go off, killing both of us.
To keep this from happening, I try to blind myself with a pencil, but I go too deeply into my brain and I stop breathing.
She opens the door to my bathroom.
I'm a pile of bleeding limbs and organs on the floor inside.
"I'm sorry, I'm sorry," I say.
"I'll clean it up, it's my fault."
I'm a tumor in her brain.
I'm benign at the moment, but every thought and effort of mine mutate me, make me more cancerous.
I need to tell her that I'm there, so that she can have me removed, but trying to think the message into her brain is only making me grow.
She looks into the mirror, surprised to see her nose bleeding.
She opens the door to my bedroom, thinking it's her own.
She screams when she sees me.
Her two halves are coming loose, and I'm trying to help her by holding her sides together.
But she thinks I'm trying to rape her, and flails wildly, which makes her split faster.
I let go and she comes apart cleanly.
I can see exactly how her body works.
I open the door to my suite.
I'm surprised to see her in my kitchen.
I take a deep breath to calm myself and greet her.
She takes out a pencil and paper and uncovers a secret threat in my sentences.
She scratches at my chest with her fingernails until my shirt is in rags.
Then she scratches my skin off.
Then slowly she wears away at the bone, until she reaches the squishier flesh inside my ribcage, which shreds easily.
She is working away at my backbone when my skeleton loses structural integrity, and I crash to the floor.
I wake up as someone else and open the door of my bedroom.
The police are there.
They tell me I'm a serial rapist and murderer.
I don't remember anything about it, but they show me the photographs.
It's true.
I open the door to my suite.
He and she are in my kitchen, I think, but I can't see them through the mass of tentacles.
I'm enveloped by them, and a quick poison sets my veins on fire.
I wake up and open the door of my bedroom.
There are hundreds of her, shoulder to shoulder, staring at me angrily.
A second gravity pulls me backwards.
I crash through the plate glass window, onto the wet grass below.
The rain turns to sharp, spiny worms that burrow into me from the sky.
Each burrowing makes a haunting, glassy tone.
The worms eat through me, turning me to crystal.
She wakes up and opens my bedroom door.
Except it isn't my bedroom door; I was never there at all.
I wake up, my eyes gone, and feel my way to my bedroom door.
I open it.
I listen carefully, but I can't tell if she's there.
Someone is breathing, maybe, or maybe it's just the air currents.
Maybe it's someone else.
I hear someone give a signal.
Then I'm tackled by something wet and warm, and knocked unconscious.
When I wake up, she is in one lung, and he is in the other.
I am very careful to breathe shallowly, to avoid crushing them.
But they're growing.
The passing train makes a low whistle and they begin to claw out of my back.
I'm bleeding out onto the wet grass, as I watch them spread their wings and fly, intertwined, into the sky.
So beautiful.
I open the door to my suite.
She's in the kitchen, already looking at me, her pupils strangely dilated.
She shoots herself in the mouth.
Jim Carrey stars as a human-headed dog who saves the world and wins the presidential election after discovering that the invading bug armies taste good to him.
Look at all the international borders drawn up by the U.S.
Congress.
There are two Sashas.
More than that, but two in the room.
One running the test, and one taking it.
It's not her fault, but the test is horribly run.
Cheating is rampant.
There's no fifteen minute warning, so when the proctor tries to snatch the paper away from me, I haven't filled out my address.
Now I'll never get into the UN, and my test scores will get out to everyone and I'm doomed to a life of poverty.
The reality is even worse than the scene we did about it.
Sing a bit to the harpsichord music, and the worms will leave my mouth.
Pull on them so they don't go back down.
My sister's applications are formatted like the programs for my high school musical, thick books with advertisements and comics in the margins.
The dean has written her a poem instead of a recommendation.
Oh, what temptation to sneak a peek at the encyclopedia of the future.
Bart is a revered historical legend, and we can't let him know that.
In class, I go on and on and on about a piano piece I've written.
I talk about dealing with small scale tonal implications in an essentially atonal piece, embedded structure, writing slowly.
As I pick up speed, I begin to cry for no apparent reason -- I'm perfectly happy.
I hold a large sprite to my face to try to halt it, but it just makes things worse.
Water gushes from my eyes, and I'm worried I'll get dehydrated.
My sister expresses grave concern.
"You haven't decided to be celibate, have you?"
The street preachers are holding a spelling bee denouncing homosexuality and godlessness.
But it lasts too long because "sin" is easy to spell.
The trouble with surveys like this is that as soon as people think they can be positively identified, their answers change radically.
"You've made your whole career on what paperweights say to their assistants, to you, but now here I am, not actually killed on the 7th of December of the past while freeing the five races from slavery, alive and lying to you in a bad disguise that will fool no one if an enemy jeep comes by, talking much too loudly to you, which bothers you, doesn't it?
And though you've made a life as a translator between humanity and the inanimate, mediating time and texture, uncovering mathematics in its most surprising incarnations, I'm still nonsense to you, and I tell you: it's not my madness but yours.
Go back to your time-lapse photography and clever model design, your musical experiments that test the limits of the dynamic spectrum and the tolerances of the ear, and I will continue to rave into my audio diary with my voice too close to your head, and you'll continue to lose your hearing, and in the dull ringing you're left with, you'll still hear nothing of the practical humanity.
This is beauty and truth!
Man beating man with sticks and bullets!
You satisy no need of mine!
Break your own damn heart!"
I'm working with the good team...
...for now.
Every time I help them out, I grunt and shrug my hands, or say "Come on!"
I need them to acknowledge I'm a good guy now.
Todd Theatre's reconstruction plans have been posted.
As per usual, they're the most ambitious and expensive of the student renovations along the Wall.
A new inside to the outside, with a new outside on it.
All surveys fed to the vending machines will be kept in strictest confidence.
The composers I respect welcome me suspiciously back to the fold.
They don't believe I'll keep writing original music.
As soon as Bob Morris looks me in the eye, he sees it: "You're just trying to impress a woman."
As soon as he says it, I know it's true, and the formal structure of the piano sonata I'm working on comes crashing down around me.
Somewhere, through the tumbling rhyme and clouds of atomised gesture, I glimpse a new music, made from delighted failure, genuine, mine.
The world is so hungry for free software that high schools are built that no-one knows about: secret training centers for our geek saviors.
Blanket torture is more complicated than you'd expect, Millicent (male) tells me.
I've been forced to read a story about him ("WRONG!"; *whipcrack*) when he appears with a foot-thick quilt.
He's going to fold it over four times, but The Diva says even then I wouldn't be dead -- this is the sick beauty of blanket torture.
It's going to be good, I tell them.
You can tell from the opening lines and the fact that Riker's beard is greying.
The personality modulation devices were hidden behind T'Pol's ears because the bad guys knew I'd be weirded out by having to reach behind her ears to remove them.
She's fine, but I need to decompress in front of the green gap in the universe.
Business at the arty store is really slow -- oh, wait, all the customers are behind me, and have been waiting forever.
"Next time, say something!"
I say, and apologize profusely.
The Habitalls, the Habitalls, Who's afraid of the Habitalls?
They're in the air, they're everywhere, Even right behind you, when they're Blue, they're blue, And now they're in front of you, You can't escape, so just relax, And waaaaaatch theeee Haaaaabitaaaaaaaalllls!
(to a theme that starts sort of like Gilligan's Island) The troupe sings this well-known tune for the admission discount, because it's kind of a cop-out, and therefore funny.
We were going to do the Common Book of Prayer, but you never know who's in the audience.
Lots of random people come up during our set and give us advice, but they have no idea what they're talking about.
Everybody, get on the red things that keep a dog from chewing themselves!
Thanks, but I already have my double caramel macchiato, hold the macchiato.
Borden says if there's any incidental expenses that they forgot to cover, he's got it: he's going to be fabulously rich.
He's learned to never stop working.
You wouldn't know from looking at him, but he hasn't goofed around in twelve years.
He holds the key to capitalism.
When we've made it through the crevasse, the ice-climber resumes telling me about his sister, whose conversion is more dangerous than his, with a hidden violence.
The vampire hunters weren't other vampires, of course, he tells me.
The sides are always uneven.
Hide in the closet all night for one abstract point.
There are inequities in policy everywhere, I tell him.
Ethics are a luxury no one can afford, he tells me.
We climb.
I'm at the movies when the call is made to ship us to the camps.
Charlie and Megan have asked me to watch their instruments, but they're lost in the shuffle.
People are being herded straight to the trains, but I try to get back to the coat room.
I'm young and can carry things, so I should fill my backpack with snack food for those weaker than me.
When I get there, my stuff is gone.
I see it being loaded onto an army supply train.
The coat will be given to a soldier, and my trumpet will be melted down for bullets.
I ask the woman at the counter if I can get to my things, but she tells me another Jew came by and claimed them.
I'm angry at the civil servant for lying to me, but I'm still a patriotic German, and I support our troops.
Clyde's applying to conservatories, and there's a form that he missed because he was scared of what it might say.
It's a long questionnaire that mostly has to do with how you'd like to pay for smoothies, the tea way or the wildcat way.
We're working on establishing a new art space.
Like Coke, the money's in the monopoly.
An iconoclastic, brilliant bus driver takes a fantastic shortcut, but can't park for beans.
Mulam is an amazing movie, daring and original.
It mixes several animation styles.
For the streets of New Delhi, where your hat is your most valuable posession, squat, flat caricatures.
A lush, flowing mirage for the potential future.
A vivid realism for the scenes here, at the wooden hephalump, where I shout "Come help me look!
Come help me look!"
from the top of the hephalump in the final scene, as Pooh and Rabbit walk off and the music swells.
Pooh draped the linguist robe around me, since I've found more languages than any other of the travellers.
Almost four hundred in two years.
I feel badly about them giving me the title, since my knowledge is so rudimentary -- other travellers have brought back much more information than I have.
Their maps are so careful, their handwriting so neat.
I was so moved I forgot to write most things down.
We see in the movie how one thing pulls at another, from across time and between worlds.
A story ends a different way, and borders shatter.
As long as you feel: "If only I had said the right thing," it's still possible that you might have.
Just when you see that two people have fallen into an honest love, no matter how sudden, you are rooting for them.
The trick is: how to show everyone, where things are real and therefore less amenable to simplification?
The answer is: live so no one blinks at revelation.
The probe is shaped like a stork's foot, five miles high, for evading radar and countermissiles.
Touchdown is in the glass flats, the dry bed of the Great Salt Lake.
You step out and trick me into buying three dead kittens in a wooden barrel.
Places where the people aren't: the power plants, the dams, the incinerators, the automated factories.
Tarski himself felt he was a radiant phenomenon.
Mottled in a hundred characters.
Not realizing the starfish until we told him in neon signage.
The video plays straight: the scalps of gold medalists have this feline thing.
We were the first to think to paste their faces over.
Speed motion, working in sandboxes, general hilarity.
We all knew it was coming, but still the punchline is like a freight train to the ankles.
Come downstairs and say hello; the anteroom is packed with the things our exes are too slow in taking back.
There's a part of Paglianni, in the courtroom, traditionally sung by a guest.
I mock it, badly, to the delight of the audience.
Another place named Berlin, north of Scandanavia, a sprawling island.
The location of the Berliner village unmarked on any map.
A wiry red-haired woman kisses me, despite her misgivings about my not being a pharmacological student.
I write a heartfelt letter to Sarah Bixby.
She writes back, with pictures from her honeymoon.
Damn it, I know about Hamlet.
And not just from the Looney Tunes.
I'm a New Yorker, remember?
Just because I program computers doesn't mean I don't have humanitarian leanings.
Anna Johnson's written this great patter song (tune vaguely reminiscent of "I Think I'll Go for a Walk Outside") about lousy great ideas that people try to sell her since she's an entrepeneur.
It's called "At the Old I.D."
A big version's on display at the last refuge of culture.
The air in a time capsule stops counting.
At the papal chapel, the three children raise their chalices and the youngest tumbles out of the balcony, smiling all the way down.
The pink programs continue to be handed out to the hungry musicians.
The cardinal praises the boy's fall, but no one is looking for him.
I go down to the bottom of the grand staircase to look for the body.
They've moved out the representational art: there are empty alcoves with empty secret panels behind them.
I walk through a tiled, echoing chamber with disco-ball light.
My arms begin to rise of their own accord.
In Tokyo there are more white people than I've ever seen in my life.
I'm visiting Jason Treuting there, but I don't get to see much of him since my partner is anxious to see the city.
He receives a prophecy to visit the bars.
This opens my eyes to the slobbery in our shared room, and I start cleaning compulsively.
As I'm trying to decide what class to beg for, more white people ask me to join their bookstore.
They pretend to be awkward, but they're subtly testing my speech and my movement, watching my partner through me.
How "balloon" has changed since the Wizard of Oz ended: Now they sometimes appear in threes, matching averages, full of tiggers and blessing.
The world is overflowing with references.
Thinking a word is like pulling a book from a tightly-packed shelf: avalanches.
Or the bookcase will turn and you'll be trapped in the secret compartment.
The American telephone is tough on the ear.
He can only celebrate his wife's new soccer contract for so long, and then he must get back to watching the Milan-Chicago planes for signs of crashing.
Here are all the ways you can make lunch in a grocery store focused on margins.
Vats large enough for evil scientists, holding cryogenic pickles: watermelon, strawberries complete with rinds.
When you pickle a strawberry, it brings out its rind.
Here's all the music Gram J wrote under her pen name.
Lyrics for Madonna, and old hymns.
Singing recipes.
You've written things you don't remember.
You were someone else entirely.
I've driven back to the homestead to be with my family.
It was a long trip.
Near the end, the simulation wasn't as careful and you slipped through things.
The neighbors have been complaining about my auto-lawnmower.
Even though it's mowing their lawns for free, it'll go by in the middle of the night and wake them.
I make a few adjustments.
Each robot that comes together to form Pravdatron tells you something about how to deal with hardship.
I'm not even close to beating the second level and still it's changed me.
The baseball season has ended, with the minor league Spinners so close to the playoffs.
There's criticism that they didn't even know how close they were.
They couldn't correctly answer questions about their record when they were hanging out in the ice cream shop after the last game, exchanging addresses since most would never see each other again.
I only have seven dollars, but they're charging me the wealthy fare.
They tell me it's because I have five houses.
I say I just have my dorm room and an emotional attachment to my parents' house, but they show them to me: some are immaterial.
I lie compulsively to try to get in, story after story.
On the inside of the library, Marjorie Whalon's new cookbook is announced.
All the copies have been reserved.
My brother (able-bodied, but more socially awkward, to the point of autism) sees me in between the stacks, gives me his fruit cup, and insists I finish it.
Around the dining room at 29 Talbot, my mom's mom is telling us what it's like to be dying.
We're all eating mince pie, her favorite.
I wish she would write down some of her feelings, but her journal just records the birds she's seen.
She talks about the voice she hears that tells us how easy it would be to die.
She doesn't listen, not because she's afraid, but because it wouldn't be sporting.
As she talks, she becomes more and more animated.
My mother says something which makes Gram break out into song and start leaping around and clapping.
I'm worried it might be too much for her, but it's so beautiful.
Sara Cohen is there and tells me that this is what my grandmother looked like when drunk.
I think I've just seen the face of God.
[There's so much I admire about the way my grandmothers died.
Not the process itself, which was in both cases an ordinary, painful species of falling apart.
But the way their disintegrations revealed the wellspring of their actions to be so selfless.
How my mom's mom smiled and cared for flowering plants, picking off their dry leaves, even after she'd forgotten everyone and had stopped speaking.
How hard my dad's mom worked to remember birthdays and keep track of what everyone was up to, trying to keep people informed of each other's doings, honest about the physical pain but not attaching any special importance to it.
Could I be in so much pain, have so little of myself left, and be so beautiful?] As much as I hate to tell you this, you don't need thirty musicians at your daughter's wedding, third cousin of mine twice removed that I've never heard of before.
All of a sudden there are dozens of strangers in close quarters.
And a television special about Thumpy Pup's two sisters that he didn't know he had.
And a puff piece in the local paper about new fads: nudity, inflatable wading pools, and hedge mazes.
All giving each other unsolicited advice.
If you're a planet, your motion is Cauchy in the distributive sense (without regard to sign, since Mercury goes the other way).
This is an aesthetic, not a truly physical law.
After all, of how many bridges can you take shaky film school footage?
My memories are all there, but somebody's moved them on me.
Who moved my cheese!?
I thought this maze folded differently.
We'd thought the dustcat was spayed, but two weeks after her death we find a kitten with two heads, one on each end.
Inbreeding.
Two-headed Matilda becomes the mascot for our reforestation effort.
The government says it'll grow back on its own, but there are so many continuous vaporized acres that we think reseeding might be necessary, and we're travelling west to see.
Ben Folds is sitting a couple of seats behind me on the school bus.
He's beside his assistant, the inspiration for Toby on The West Wing.
Ben's depressed and watns his vegan Lucky Charms airlifted in.
Toby says he should save his six bucks a bowl and eat wood chips.
Some horried cross between a musical and a reality TV show.
The mountain rope can be climbed: just put two people on either side of it.
The romantic comedy of the year is a boy and his trans friend.
They're always fooling the police by pretending to be dumber and more rasta than they are.
The locally-owned CD store isn't competing anymore.
Now they sell interesting papers: zines, doodles, love letters.
One says TV/video, the other says input, but it's so easy to confuse the two, wander outside of the circle and dissolve.
Don't.
It's even more of a pain to take trips with randomly assigned families.
I've ended up in charge by default, since no one else will voice an opinion or come up with ideas.
Everyone just wants to complain about how stupid everyone else is, and throw things.
We miss our train, so we're going to drive to Phoenix an hour to pick it up there.
The assigned mother refuses to wait until we're ready to start the van, driving off with the doors open.
Everything flies out, so of course it's my job to walk out into traffic and get it all.
At least it's not like living with my aunt.
She wasn't related to me at all either, but that's what she made me call her.
There was a mute little girl with us that wouldn't eat.
She might have looked exactly like me if she hadn't been so emaciated.
It was like having a circus mirror follow me around.
No one outside knew about the extra child.
Near the end of her life, I often had to carry her.
It wasn't hard, even for a seven-year-old.
She was so brittle, and her skin felt dessicated, like dried fruit.
Her smell was strange, but comforting.
I took out the bones with a penknife when she died, and we reused them for everything.
There's really nothing to see on Boyle Street -- some florists, some greasy spoons, some barbershops -- but that's what people will ask you if you've seen, so I should show it to you.
They think it's the place you should see, just because I put it in a song.
What I really want to show you is the railyards, back behind the trailer park I lived in before my mom got married.
The tracks are what's organic here.
It's the little stubborn plants that are invented.
Sometimes my friends and I would go out there at night, and jump onto passing trains, and ride for a while.
We weren't stupid and didn't think we were immortal.
We knew how dangerous it was.
But the possibility of living outweighed the chance of dying.
I couldn't get out of that town any other way than doing something crazy or dying.
On the Friday night sleeper, we'd always aim for the same spot: Big Talker's cabin.
Big Talker would go on all night about panning for gold, idempotent latitudes, moral imperatives, and the bouquet of the wine he was drinking.
Sometimes we'd ride all the way to Scranton and wait for the early morning freight to take us home, not getting back until dawn broke.
On the freight, we'd repeat everything Big Talker said, in as close an imitation of his self-important, fat, precise voice as we could manage.
One time, Big Talker told what he took to be a funny story, about this guy he worked for, Rumsfeld.
A college buddy of Rumsfeld was down on his luck, and needed a job in Rumsfeld's department.
Rumsfeld thought the buddy's daughter was hot, so the buddy drugged her, and the senior staff did horrible things to her, which Big Talker described in gleeful detail.
But the woman's father didn't drug her enough, and she woke up to Rumsfeld standing over her and a statue of justice...
We were silent on the freight train back, for a long time.
We wouldn't look each other in the eyes.
Becky was tearing at the skin of her fingers and staring blankly into the distance.
Jim was scratching at the metal of the car with his pocket knife.
My voice wouldn't work to ask him to stop.
Finally, we started plotting ways to kill Big Talker.
But we knew we should get the story to the media instead.
We tracked down the woman, and called her, to try to convince her to come forward.
"It doesn't matter," she told us.
"It's over.
And no one would believe me, anyway.
It's happened to other women, too.
People have told newspapers and TV stations.
But it doesn't make a good story: it doesn't fit the story they're already telling."
So here I am, in a stadium full of wonderful, gracious people with good taste in music, finally telling you.
I know you didn't pay fifty bucks to hear this.
You came to hear us play.
But before I can sing, you all have to promise to believe her.
Say you promise.
[yesterday morning: zombie-state on the Greyhound, no dreams] Matt Spada has set up his fortress of solitude under the fold-out bed.
When we find him, the party's almost over and we've been jumping on the bed all night.
He's mangled.
We arrange him carefully on the sundial and wait for the chariots.
There's a name for the pattern of the injuries and the color of the blood: agnaretto.
People treat me gently, try not to stare, look like they're about to cry.
Am I missing a limb, or a part of my face?
I count again, but I'm not sure what I'm supposed to have.
Maybe it's my clothes.
My t-shirt is too small and my sock elastics are worn out.
If my sister sees me like this, she'll ask if I've had people pray over me.
Here's a handy revival.
Miraculous: when the music plays and the rain comes down, I lie down in the grass, but my weight is supported by my heel, attached to a manhole cover.
With the rest of me an inch above the ground, I can whirl.
I'm swept up in communion, a horizontal dervish.
This causes the assistant pastor's new guitar to wear out more quickly, but he remains calm, leading the congregation in a prayer that I be sucked into hell right away, God willing.
I don't make it there, because the women's room is mislabelled, and I'm needed out the back, in the underground.
Here you splinter into everyone you are.
There are hundreds of me, most of whom I've never met.
Another, diseased tribe is approaching.
Do we huddle to avoid infection?
Do we kill it?
It's too late: protocol demands we mingle.
I take the disease into myself, and teach the other one to speak again.
He's off to apply for a Supreme Court justiceship.
I'm swept along with his ambition, onto a ferry in Milan.
Traffic has restricted us to the moat around the Peace Fountain.
There's an announcement: someone has stolen one of the ancient candles, and a $500,000 bounty is out.
The thief, a prankster tourist, steps forward out of fear.
There's a bounty to be paid, and no one else is claiming it, so I do.
Now it's too dangerous to speak.
I must go into the desert to train.
They're picking the examples with just twos and threes, so that there's a single stable configuration, but that doesn't illuminate the general case at all.
You can't always build it from toothpicks.
The man beside me is washing his hands, too.
"Aren't you going to wash your hands," he asks.
"I am," the other man says.
"I wasn't talking to you."
But there's only the two of them.
It's much too fancy.
Even though I arranged it, the caterers physically restrain me from entering from the side.
"You'll have to show your ticket in front like everyone else."
I shouldn't need a ticket: it's MY CASTLE!
My dad tries to lighten the mood with a star trek game, but you can only play with three, and dozens need to escape.
They wail that they'll be left behind in the void.
They will be.
One void-creature, vaster than solar systems, entangles with another, violently.
They're building a hydrogen gap between the filamented galaxies.
It's not wise to be nearby.
Their spines flash, patterns travelling like lightning.
There's a rule of thumb out here, somewhere.
I've finally escaped from the experimental hospital, and I'm out to dinner with the rest of the resistance.
Someone is trying to tell me that masculinity is a result of sperm count, and that because I was so good at escaping, I might be infertile.
I don't believe them.
They insist and offer to have mine counted for free, but I tell them I don't need to know yet.
Not until the time comes when I want to have children.
Martha Cluver finds the idea of me ever finding a mate hilarious, and miso soup sprays from her nose.
Back at the hospital, the two of them are learning to see each other without their eyes.
They've had the patches on for years now.
Progress is slow, but it's clear: it's happening.
Did I ever get out from under the bed, or is my freedom just another experiment?
They know so much about me, even more than I do.
