All I could see from where I stood Was three long mountains and a wood; I turned and looked another way, And saw three islands in a bay.
So with my eyes I traced the line Of the horizon, thin and fine, Straight around till I was come Back to where I'd started from; And all I saw from where I stood Was three long mountains and a wood.
Over these things I could not see; These were the things that bounded me; And I could touch them with my hand, Almost, I thought, from where I stand.
And all at once things seemed so small My breath came short, and scarce at all.
But, sure, the sky is big, I said; Miles and miles above my head; So here upon my back I'll lie And look my fill into the sky.
And so I looked, and, after all, The sky was not so very tall.
The sky, I said, must somewhere stop, And--sure enough!--I see the top!
The sky, I thought, is not so grand; I 'most could touch it with my hand!
And reaching up my hand to try, I screamed to feel it touch the sky.
I screamed, and--lo!--Infinity Came down and settled over me; Forced back my scream into my chest, Bent back my arm upon my breast, And, pressing of the Undefined The definition on my mind, Held up before my eyes a glass Through which my shrinking sight did pass Until it seemed I must behold Immensity made manifold; Whispered to me a word whose sound Deafened the air for worlds around, And brought unmuffled to my ears The gossiping of friendly spheres, The creaking of the tented sky, The ticking of Eternity.
I saw and heard, and knew at last The How and Why of all things, past, And present, and forevermore.
The Universe, cleft to the core, Lay open to my probing sense That, sick'ning, I would fain pluck thence But could not,--nay!
But needs must suck At the great wound, and could not pluck My lips away till I had drawn All venom out.--Ah, fearful pawn!
For my omniscience paid I toll In infinite remorse of soul.
All sin was of my sinning, all Atoning mine, and mine the gall Of all regret.
Mine was the weight Of every brooded wrong, the hate That stood behind each envious thrust, Mine every greed, mine every lust.
And all the while for every grief, Each suffering, I craved relief With individual desire,-- Craved all in vain!
And felt fierce fire About a thousand people crawl; Perished with each,--then mourned for all!
A man was starving in Capri; He moved his eyes and looked at me; I felt his gaze, I heard his moan, And knew his hunger as my own.
I saw at sea a great fog bank Between two ships that struck and sank; A thousand screams the heavens smote; And every scream tore through my throat.
No hurt I did not feel, no death That was not mine; mine each last breath That, crying, met an answering cry From the compassion that was I.
All suffering mine, and mine its rod; Mine, pity like the pity of God.
Ah, awful weight!
Infinity Pressed down upon the finite Me!
My anguished spirit, like a bird, Beating against my lips I heard; Yet lay the weight so close about There was no room for it without.
And so beneath the weight lay I And suffered death, but could not die.
Long had I lain thus, craving death, When quietly the earth beneath Gave way, and inch by inch, so great At last had grown the crushing weight, Into the earth I sank till I Full six feet under ground did lie, And sank no more,--there is no weight Can follow here, however great.
From off my breast I felt it roll, And as it went my tortured soul Burst forth and fled in such a gust That all about me swirled the dust.
Deep in the earth I rested now; Cool is its hand upon the brow And soft its breast beneath the head Of one who is so gladly dead.
And all at once, and over all The pitying rain began to fall; I lay and heard each pattering hoof Upon my lowly, thatched roof, And seemed to love the sound far more Than ever I had done before.
For rain it hath a friendly sound To one who's six feet underground; And scarce the friendly voice or face: A grave is such a quiet place.
The rain, I said, is kind to come And speak to me in my new home.
I would I were alive again To kiss the fingers of the rain, To drink into my eyes the shine Of every slanting silver line, To catch the freshened, fragrant breeze From drenched and dripping apple-trees.
For soon the shower will be done, And then the broad face of the sun Will laugh above the rain-soaked earth Until the world with answering mirth Shakes joyously, and each round drop Rolls, twinkling, from its grass-blade top.
How can I bear it; buried here, While overhead the sky grows clear And blue again after the storm?
O, multi-colored, multiform, Beloved beauty over me, That I shall never, never see Again!
Spring-silver, autumn-gold, That I shall never more behold!
Sleeping your myriad magics through, Close-sepulchred away from you!
O God, I cried, give me new birth, And put me back upon the earth!
Upset each cloud's gigantic gourd And let the heavy rain, down-poured In one big torrent, set me free, Washing my grave away from me!
I ceased; and through the breathless hush That answered me, the far-off rush Of herald wings came whispering Like music down the vibrant string Of my ascending prayer, and--crash!
Before the wild wind's whistling lash The startled storm-clouds reared on high And plunged in terror down the sky, And the big rain in one black wave Fell from the sky and struck my grave.
I know not how such things can be; I only know there came to me A fragrance such as never clings To aught save happy living things; A sound as of some joyous elf Singing sweet songs to please himself, And, through and over everything, A sense of glad awakening.
The grass, a-tiptoe at my ear, Whispering to me I could hear; I felt the rain's cool finger-tips Brushed tenderly across my lips, Laid gently on my sealed sight, And all at once the heavy night Fell from my eyes and I could see,-- A drenched and dripping apple-tree, A last long line of silver rain, A sky grown clear and blue again.
And as I looked a quickening gust Of wind blew up to me and thrust Into my face a miracle Of orchard-breath, and with the smell,-- I know not how such things can be!-- I breathed my soul back into me.
Ah!
Up then from the ground sprang I And hailed the earth with such a cry As is not heard save from a man Who has been dead, and lives again.
About the trees my arms I wound; Like one gone mad I hugged the ground; I raised my quivering arms on high; I laughed and laughed into the sky, Till at my throat a strangling sob Caught fiercely, and a great heart-throb Sent instant tears into my eyes; O God, I cried, no dark disguise Can e'er hereafter hide from me Thy radiant identity!
Thou canst not move across the grass But my quick eyes will see Thee pass, Nor speak, however silently, But my hushed voice will answer Thee.
I know the path that tells Thy way Through the cool eve of every day; God, I can push the grass apart And lay my finger on Thy heart!
The world stands out on either side No wider than the heart is wide; Above the world is stretched the sky,-- No higher than the soul is high.
The heart can push the sea and land Farther away on either hand; The soul can split the sky in two, And let the face of God shine through.
But East and West will pinch the heart That can not keep them pushed apart; And he whose soul is flat--the sky Will cave in on him by and by.
The room is full of you!--As I came in And closed the door behind me, all at once A something in the air, intangible, Yet stiff with meaning, struck my senses sick!-- Sharp, unfamiliar odors have destroyed Each other room's dear personality.
The heavy scent of damp, funereal flowers,-- The very essence, hush-distilled, of Death-- Has strangled that habitual breath of home Whose expiration leaves all houses dead; And wheresoe'er I look is hideous change.
Save here.
Here 'twas as if a weed-choked gate Had opened at my touch, and I had stepped Into some long-forgot, enchanted, strange, Sweet garden of a thousand years ago And suddenly thought, "I have been here before!"
You are not here.
I know that you are gone, And will not ever enter here again.
And yet it seems to me, if I should speak, Your silent step must wake across the hall; If I should turn my head, that your sweet eyes Would kiss me from the door.--So short a time To teach my life its transposition to This difficult and unaccustomed key!-- The room is as you left it; your last touch-- A thoughtless pressure, knowing not itself As saintly--hallows now each simple thing; Hallows and glorifies, and glows between The dust's grey fingers like a shielded light.
There is your book, just as you laid it down, Face to the table,--I cannot believe That you are gone!--Just then it seemed to me You must be here.
I almost laughed to think How like reality the dream had been; Yet knew before I laughed, and so was still.
That book, outspread, just as you laid it down!
Perhaps you thought, "I wonder what comes next, And whether this or this will be the end"; So rose, and left it, thinking to return.
Perhaps that chair, when you arose and passed Out of the room, rocked silently a while Ere it again was still.
When you were gone Forever from the room, perhaps that chair, Stirred by your movement, rocked a little while, Silently, to and fro.
And here are the last words your fingers wrote, Scrawled in broad characters across a page In this brown book I gave you.
Here your hand, Guiding your rapid pen, moved up and down.
Here with a looping knot you crossed a "t", And here another like it, just beyond These two eccentric "e's".
You were so small, And wrote so brave a hand!
How strange it seems That of all words these are the words you chose!
And yet a simple choice; you did not know You would not write again.
If you had known-- But then, it does not matter,--and indeed If you had known there was so little time You would have dropped your pen and come to me And this page would be empty, and some phrase Other than this would hold my wonder now.
Yet, since you could not know, and it befell That these are the last words your fingers wrote, There is a dignity some might not see In this, "I picked the first sweet-pea to-day."
To-day!
Was there an opening bud beside it You left until to-morrow?--O my love, The things that withered,--and you came not back!
That day you filled this circle of my arms That now is empty.
(O my empty life!)
That day--that day you picked the first sweet-pea,-- And brought it in to show me!
I recall With terrible distinctness how the smell Of your cool gardens drifted in with you.
I know, you held it up for me to see And flushed because I looked not at the flower, But at your face; and when behind my look You saw such unmistakable intent You laughed and brushed your flower against my lips.
(You were the fairest thing God ever made, I think.)
And then your hands above my heart Drew down its stem into a fastening, And while your head was bent I kissed your hair.
I wonder if you knew.
(Beloved hands!
Somehow I cannot seem to see them still.
Somehow I cannot seem to see the dust In your bright hair.)
What is the need of Heaven When earth can be so sweet?--If only God Had let us love,--and show the world the way!
Strange cancellings must ink th' eternal books When love-crossed-out will bring the answer right!
That first sweet-pea!
I wonder where it is.
It seems to me I laid it down somewhere, And yet,--I am not sure.
I am not sure, Even, if it was white or pink; for then 'Twas much like any other flower to me, Save that it was the first.
I did not know, Then, that it was the last.
If I had known-- But then, it does not matter.
Strange how few, After all's said and done, the things that are Of moment.
Few indeed!
When I can make Of ten small words a rope to hang the world!
"I had you and I have you now no more."
There, there it dangles,--where's the little truth That can for long keep footing under that When its slack syllables tighten to a thought?
Here, let me write it down!
I wish to see Just how a thing like that will look on paper!
"*I had you and I have you now no more*."
O little words, how can you run so straight Across the page, beneath the weight you bear?
How can you fall apart, whom such a theme Has bound together, and hereafter aid In trivial expression, that have been So hideously dignified?--Would God That tearing you apart would tear the thread I strung you on!
Would God--O God, my mind Stretches asunder on this merciless rack Of imagery!
O, let me sleep a while!
Would I could sleep, and wake to find me back In that sweet summer afternoon with you.
Summer?
'Tis summer still by the calendar!
How easily could God, if He so willed, Set back the world a little turn or two!
Correct its griefs, and bring its joys again!
We were so wholly one I had not thought That we could die apart.
I had not thought That I could move,--and you be stiff and still!
That I could speak,--and you perforce be dumb!
I think our heart-strings were, like warp and woof In some firm fabric, woven in and out; Your golden filaments in fair design Across my duller fibre.
And to-day The shining strip is rent; the exquisite Fine pattern is destroyed; part of your heart Aches in my breast; part of my heart lies chilled In the damp earth with you.
I have been torn In two, and suffer for the rest of me.
What is my life to me?
And what am I To life,--a ship whose star has guttered out?
A Fear that in the deep night starts awake Perpetually, to find its senses strained Against the taut strings of the quivering air, Awaiting the return of some dread chord?
Dark, Dark, is all I find for metaphor; All else were contrast,--save that contrast's wall Is down, and all opposed things flow together Into a vast monotony, where night And day, and frost and thaw, and death and life, Are synonyms.
What now--what now to me Are all the jabbering birds and foolish flowers That clutter up the world?
You were my song!
Now, let discord scream!
You were my flower!
Now let the world grow weeds!
For I shall not Plant things above your grave--(the common balm Of the conventional woe for its own wound!)
Amid sensations rendered negative By your elimination stands to-day, Certain, unmixed, the element of grief; I sorrow; and I shall not mock my truth With travesties of suffering, nor seek To effigy its incorporeal bulk In little wry-faced images of woe.
I cannot call you back; and I desire No utterance of my immaterial voice.
I cannot even turn my face this way Or that, and say, "My face is turned to you"; I know not where you are, I do not know If Heaven hold you or if earth transmute, Body and soul, you into earth again; But this I know:--not for one second's space Shall I insult my sight with visionings Such as the credulous crowd so eager-eyed Beholds, self-conjured, in the empty air.
Let the world wail!
Let drip its easy tears!
My sorrow shall be dumb!
--What do I say?
God!
God!--God pity me!
Am I gone mad That I should spit upon a rosary?
Am I become so shrunken?
Would to God I too might feel that frenzied faith whose touch Makes temporal the most enduring grief; Though it must walk a while, as is its wont, With wild lamenting!
Would I too might weep Where weeps the world and hangs its piteous wreaths For its new dead!
Not Truth, but Faith, it is That keeps the world alive.
If all at once Faith were to slacken,--that unconscious faith Which must, I know, yet be the corner-stone Of all believing,--birds now flying fearless Across would drop in terror to the earth; Fishes would drown; and the all-governing reins Would tangle in the frantic hands of God And the worlds gallop headlong to destruction!
O God, I see it now, and my sick brain Staggers and swoons!
How often over me Flashes this breathlessness of sudden sight In which I see the universe unrolled Before me like a scroll and read thereon Chaos and Doom, where helpless planets whirl Dizzily round and round and round and round, Like tops across a table, gathering speed With every spin, to waver on the edge One instant--looking over--and the next To shudder and lurch forward out of sight-- Ah, I am worn out--I am wearied out-- It is too much--I am but flesh and blood, And I must sleep.
Though you were dead again, I am but flesh and blood and I must sleep.
"Curse thee, Life, I will live with thee no more!
Thou hast mocked me, starved me, beat my body sore!
And all for a pledge that was not pledged by me, I have kissed thy crust and eaten sparingly That I might eat again, and met thy sneers With deprecations, and thy blows with tears,-- Aye, from thy glutted lash, glad, crawled away, As if spent passion were a holiday!
And now I go.
Nor threat, nor easy vow Of tardy kindness can avail thee now With me, whence fear and faith alike are flown; Lonely I came, and I depart alone, And know not where nor unto whom I go; But that thou canst not follow me I know."
Thus I to Life, and ceased; but through my brain My thought ran still, until I spake again: "Ah, but I go not as I came,--no trace Is mine to bear away of that old grace I brought!
I have been heated in thy fires, Bent by thy hands, fashioned to thy desires, Thy mark is on me!
I am not the same Nor ever more shall be, as when I came.
Ashes am I of all that once I seemed.
In me all's sunk that leapt, and all that dreamed Is wakeful for alarm,--oh, shame to thee, For the ill change that thou hast wrought in me, Who laugh no more nor lift my throat to sing!
Ah, Life, I would have been a pleasant thing To have about the house when I was grown If thou hadst left my little joys alone!
I asked of thee no favor save this one: That thou wouldst leave me playing in the sun!
And this thou didst deny, calling my name Insistently, until I rose and came.
I saw the sun no more.--It were not well So long on these unpleasant thoughts to dwell, Need I arise to-morrow and renew Again my hated tasks, but I am through With all things save my thoughts and this one night, So that in truth I seem already quite Free and remote from thee,--I feel no haste And no reluctance to depart; I taste Merely, with thoughtful mien, an unknown draught, That in a little while I shall have quaffed."
Thus I to Life, and ceased, and slightly smiled, Looking at nothing; and my thin dreams filed Before me one by one till once again I set new words unto an old refrain: "Treasures thou hast that never have been mine!
Warm lights in many a secret chamber shine Of thy gaunt house, and gusts of song have blown Like blossoms out to me that sat alone!
And I have waited well for thee to show If any share were mine,--and now I go!
Nothing I leave, and if I naught attain I shall but come into mine own again!"
Thus I to Life, and ceased, and spake no more, But turning, straightway, sought a certain door In the rear wall.
Heavy it was, and low And dark,--a way by which none e'er would go That other exit had, and never knock Was heard thereat,--bearing a curious lock Some chance had shown me fashioned faultily, Whereof Life held content the useless key, And great coarse hinges, thick and rough with rust, Whose sudden voice across a silence must, I knew, be harsh and horrible to hear,-- A strange door, ugly like a dwarf.--So near I came I felt upon my feet the chill Of acid wind creeping across the sill.
So stood longtime, till over me at last Came weariness, and all things other passed To make it room; the still night drifted deep Like snow about me, and I longed for sleep.
But, suddenly, marking the morning hour, Bayed the deep-throated bell within the tower!
Startled, I raised my head,--and with a shout Laid hold upon the latch,--and was without.
Ah, long-forgotten, well-remembered road, Leading me back unto my old abode, My father's house!
There in the night I came, And found them feasting, and all things the same As they had been before.
A splendour hung Upon the walls, and such sweet songs were sung As, echoing out of very long ago, Had called me from the house of Life, I know.
So fair their raiment shone I looked in shame On the unlovely garb in which I came; Then straightway at my hesitancy mocked: "It is my father's house!"
I said and knocked; And the door opened.
To the shining crowd Tattered and dark I entered, like a cloud, Seeing no face but his; to him I crept, And "Father!"
I cried, and clasped his knees, and wept.
Ah, days of joy that followed!
All alone I wandered through the house.
My own, my own, My own to touch, my own to taste and smell, All I had lacked so long and loved so well!
None shook me out of sleep, nor hushed my song, Nor called me in from the sunlight all day long.
I know not when the wonder came to me Of what my father's business might be, And whither fared and on what errands bent The tall and gracious messengers he sent.
Yet one day with no song from dawn till night Wondering, I sat, and watched them out of sight.
And the next day I called; and on the third Asked them if I might go,--but no one heard.
Then, sick with longing, I arose at last And went unto my father,--in that vast Chamber wherein he for so many years Has sat, surrounded by his charts and spheres.
"Father," I said, "Father, I cannot play The harp that thou didst give me, and all day I sit in idleness, while to and fro About me thy serene, grave servants go; And I am weary of my lonely ease.
Better a perilous journey overseas Away from thee, than this, the life I lead, To sit all day in the sunshine like a weed That grows to naught,--I love thee more than they Who serve thee most; yet serve thee in no way.
Father, I beg of thee a little task To dignify my days,--'tis all I ask Forever, but forever, this denied, I perish."
"Child," my father's voice replied, "All things thy fancy hath desired of me Thou hast received.
I have prepared for thee Within my house a spacious chamber, where Are delicate things to handle and to wear, And all these things are thine.
Dost thou love song?
My minstrels shall attend thee all day long.
Or sigh for flowers?
My fairest gardens stand Open as fields to thee on every hand.
And all thy days this word shall hold the same: No pleasure shalt thou lack that thou shalt name.
But as for tasks--" he smiled, and shook his head; "Thou hadst thy task, and laidst it by", he said.
O world, I cannot hold thee close enough!
Thy winds, thy wide grey skies!
Thy mists, that roll and rise!
Thy woods, this autumn day, that ache and sag And all but cry with colour!
That gaunt crag To crush!
To lift the lean of that black bluff!
World, World, I cannot get thee close enough!
Long have I known a glory in it all, But never knew I this; Here such a passion is As stretcheth me apart,--Lord, I do fear Thou'st made the world too beautiful this year; My soul is all but out of me,--let fall No burning leaf; prithee, let no bird call.
I will be the gladdest thing Under the sun!
I will touch a hundred flowers And not pick one.
I will look at cliffs and clouds With quiet eyes, Watch the wind bow down the grass, And the grass rise.
And when lights begin to show Up from the town, I will mark which must be mine, And then start down!
Sorrow like a ceaseless rain Beats upon my heart.
People twist and scream in pain,-- Dawn will find them still again; This has neither wax nor wane, Neither stop nor start.
People dress and go to town; I sit in my chair.
All my thoughts are slow and brown: Standing up or sitting down Little matters, or what gown Or what shoes I wear.
I'll keep a little tavern Below the high hill's crest, Wherein all grey-eyed people May set them down and rest.
There shall be plates a-plenty, And mugs to melt the chill Of all the grey-eyed people Who happen up the hill.
There sound will sleep the traveller, And dream his journey's end, But I will rouse at midnight The falling fire to tend.
Aye, 'tis a curious fancy-- But all the good I know Was taught me out of two grey eyes A long time ago.
Love has gone and left me and the days are all alike; Eat I must, and sleep I will,--and would that night were here!
But ah!--to lie awake and hear the slow hours strike!
Would that it were day again!--with twilight near!
Love has gone and left me and I don't know what to do; This or that or what you will is all the same to me; But all the things that I begin I leave before I'm through,-- There's little use in anything as far as I can see.
Love has gone and left me,--and the neighbors knock and borrow, And life goes on forever like the gnawing of a mouse,-- And to-morrow and to-morrow and to-morrow and to-morrow There's this little street and this little house.
I knew her for a little ghost That in my garden walked; The wall is high--higher than most-- And the green gate was locked.
And yet I did not think of that Till after she was gone-- I knew her by the broad white hat, All ruffled, she had on.
By the dear ruffles round her feet, By her small hands that hung In their lace mitts, austere and sweet, Her gown's white folds among.
I watched to see if she would stay, What she would do--and oh!
She looked as if she liked the way I let my garden grow!
She bent above my favourite mint With conscious garden grace, She smiled and smiled--there was no hint Of sadness in her face.
She held her gown on either side To let her slippers show, And up the walk she went with pride, The way great ladies go.
And where the wall is built in new And is of ivy bare She paused--then opened and passed through A gate that once was there.
Am I kin to Sorrow, That so oft Falls the knocker of my door-- Neither loud nor soft, But as long accustomed, Under Sorrow's hand?
Marigolds around the step And rosemary stand, And then comes Sorrow-- And what does Sorrow care For the rosemary Or the marigolds there?
Am I kin to Sorrow?
Are we kin?
That so oft upon my door-- *Oh, come in*!
The first rose on my rose-tree Budded, bloomed, and shattered, During sad days when to me Nothing mattered.
Grief of grief has drained me clean; Still it seems a pity No one saw,--it must have been Very pretty.
Let the little birds sing; Let the little lambs play; Spring is here; and so 'tis spring;-- But not in the old way!
I recall a place Where a plum-tree grew; There you lifted up your face, And blossoms covered you.
If the little birds sing, And the little lambs play, Spring is here; and so 'tis spring-- But not in the old way!
All the dog-wood blossoms are underneath the tree!
Ere spring was going--ah, spring is gone!
And there comes no summer to the like of you and me,-- Blossom time is early, but no fruit sets on.
All the dog-wood blossoms are underneath the tree, Browned at the edges, turned in a day; And I would with all my heart they trimmed a mound for me, And weeds were tall on all the paths that led that way!
Death, I say, my heart is bowed Unto thine,--O mother!
This red gown will make a shroud Good as any other!
(I, that would not wait to wear My own bridal things, In a dress dark as my hair Made my answerings.
I, to-night, that till he came Could not, could not wait, In a gown as bright as flame Held for them the gate.)
Death, I say, my heart is bowed Unto thine,--O mother!
This red gown will make a shroud Good as any other!
Love, if I weep it will not matter, And if you laugh I shall not care; Foolish am I to think about it, But it is good to feel you there.
Love, in my sleep I dreamed of waking,-- White and awful the moonlight reached Over the floor, and somewhere, somewhere, There was a shutter loose,--it screeched!
Swung in the wind,--and no wind blowing!-- I was afraid, and turned to you, Put out my hand to you for comfort,-- And you were gone!
Cold, cold as dew, Under my hand the moonlight lay!
Love, if you laugh I shall not care, But if I weep it will not matter,-- Ah, it is good to feel you there!
I said,--for Love was laggard, O, Love was slow to come,-- "I'll hear his step and know his step when I am warm in bed; But I'll never leave my pillow, though there be some As would let him in--and take him in with tears!"
I said.
I lay,--for Love was laggard, O, he came not until dawn,-- I lay and listened for his step and could not get to sleep; And he found me at my window with my big cloak on, All sorry with the tears some folks might weep!
She is neither pink nor pale, And she never will be all mine; She learned her hands in a fairy-tale, And her mouth on a valentine.
She has more hair than she needs; In the sun 'tis a woe to me!
And her voice is a string of colored beads, Or steps leading into the sea.
She loves me all that she can, And her ways to my ways resign; But she was not made for any man, And she never will be all mine.
Hard seeds of hate I planted That should by now be grown,-- Rough stalks, and from thick stamens A poisonous pollen blown, And odors rank, unbreathable, From dark corollas thrown!
At dawn from my damp garden I shook the chilly dew; The thin boughs locked behind me That sprang to let me through; The blossoms slept,--I sought a place Where nothing lovely grew.
And there, when day was breaking, I knelt and looked around: The light was near, the silence Was palpitant with sound; I drew my hate from out my breast And thrust it in the ground.
Oh, ye so fiercely tended, Ye little seeds of hate!
I bent above your growing Early and noon and late, Yet are ye drooped and pitiful,-- I cannot rear ye straight!
The sun seeks out my garden, No nook is left in shade, No mist nor mold nor mildew Endures on any blade, Sweet rain slants under every bough: Ye falter, and ye fade.
I cannot but remember When the year grows old-- October--November-- How she disliked the cold!
She used to watch the swallows Go down across the sky, And turn from the window With a little sharp sigh.
And often when the brown leaves Were brittle on the ground, And the wind in the chimney Made a melancholy sound, She had a look about her That I wish I could forget-- The look of a scared thing Sitting in a net!
Oh, beautiful at nightfall The soft spitting snow!
And beautiful the bare boughs Rubbing to and fro!
But the roaring of the fire, And the warmth of fur, And the boiling of the kettle Were beautiful to her!
I cannot but remember When the year grows old-- October--November-- How she disliked the cold!
Thou art not lovelier than lilacs,--no, Nor honeysuckle; thou art not more fair Than small white single poppies,--I can bear Thy beauty; though I bend before thee, though From left to right, not knowing where to go, I turn my troubled eyes, nor here nor there Find any refuge from thee, yet I swear So has it been with mist,--with moonlight so.
Like him who day by day unto his draught Of delicate poison adds him one drop more Till he may drink unharmed the death of ten, Even so, inured to beauty, who have quaffed Each hour more deeply than the hour before, I drink--and live--what has destroyed some men.
Time does not bring relief; you all have lied Who told me time would ease me of my pain!
I miss him in the weeping of the rain; I want him at the shrinking of the tide; The old snows melt from every mountain-side, And last year's leaves are smoke in every lane; But last year's bitter loving must remain Heaped on my heart, and my old thoughts abide!
There are a hundred places where I fear To go,--so with his memory they brim!
And entering with relief some quiet place Where never fell his foot or shone his face I say, "There is no memory of him here!"
And so stand stricken, so remembering him!
Mindful of you the sodden earth in spring, And all the flowers that in the springtime grow, And dusty roads, and thistles, and the slow Rising of the round moon, all throats that sing The summer through, and each departing wing, And all the nests that the bared branches show, And all winds that in any weather blow, And all the storms that the four seasons bring.
You go no more on your exultant feet Up paths that only mist and morning knew, Or watch the wind, or listen to the beat Of a bird's wings too high in air to view,-- But you were something more than young and sweet And fair,--and the long year remembers you.
Not in this chamber only at my birth-- When the long hours of that mysterious night Were over, and the morning was in sight-- I cried, but in strange places, steppe and firth I have not seen, through alien grief and mirth; And never shall one room contain me quite Who in so many rooms first saw the light, Child of all mothers, native of the earth.
So is no warmth for me at any fire To-day, when the world's fire has burned so low; I kneel, spending my breath in vain desire, At that cold hearth which one time roared so strong, And straighten back in weariness, and long To gather up my little gods and go.
If I should learn, in some quite casual way, That you were gone, not to return again-- Read from the back-page of a paper, say, Held by a neighbor in a subway train, How at the corner of this avenue And such a street (so are the papers filled) A hurrying man--who happened to be you-- At noon to-day had happened to be killed, I should not cry aloud--I could not cry Aloud, or wring my hands in such a place-- I should but watch the station lights rush by With a more careful interest on my face, Or raise my eyes and read with greater care Where to store furs and how to treat the hair.
This door you might not open, and you did; So enter now, and see for what slight thing You are betrayed.
Here is no treasure hid, No cauldron, no clear crystal mirroring The sought-for truth, no heads of women slain For greed like yours, no writhings of distress, But only what you see.
Look yet again-- An empty room, cobwebbed and comfortless.
Yet this alone out of my life I kept Unto myself, lest any know me quite; And you did so profane me when you crept Unto the threshold of this room to-night That I must never more behold your face.
This now is yours.
I seek another place.
What think you,—lies there any truth in the tale The King will wed again?
Why not, Anselmo?
A king is no less lonely than a collier When his wife dies, And his young daughter there, For all her being a princess, is no less A motherless child, and cries herself to sleep Night after night, as noisily as any, You may be sure.
A motherless child loves not, They say, the second mother.
Though the King May find him comfort in another face,— As it is well he should—the child, I fancy, Is not so lonely as she is distraught With grief for the dead Queen, and will not lightly Be parted from her tears.
If tales be true, The woman hath a daughter, near the age Of his, will be a playmate for the Princess.
You,—Fool!
If there be two chords to your lute, Give us the other for a time!
And yet, Laura, I somewhat fancied that soft sound he made.
'Twas all on the same tone,—but 'twas a sweet tone.
'Tis like you.
As for myself, let music change From time to time, or have done altogether.
Sing us the song, Fidelio, that you made Last night,—a song of flowers, and fair skies, And nightingales, and love.
I know the song.
It is a song of winter.
How is that?
Because it is a song of summer set To a sad tune.
Ah, well,—so that it be not A song of autumn, I can bear to hear it.
In any case, music.
I am in a mood for music.
I am in a mood where if something be not done To startle me, I shall confess my sins.
Ha!
I will have that woman yet by the hair!
What woman, pray, Carlotta?
Ho!
What woman!
Who but that scullery-wench, that onion-monger, That slatternly, pale bakress, that foul witch, The coroneted Fish-Wife of Fiori, Her Majesty, the Queen!
Hush—hush—Carlotta!
You could be put to death for less than that!
Not I, my duck.
When I am put to death 'Twill be for more!
Oh, I will have her yet By the hair!
 Fidelio, if you breathe one word Of this, I will scratch the Princess into ribbons, Whom you love better than your wit.
I' faith, I did but hear you say you are a fish-wife, And all the world knows that.
Fear not, Carlotta, He is as dumb as a prophet.
Every second word He utters, eats the one before it.
Speak, But softly.
Nay,'tis nothing.—Nay, by my head, It is a townful!
'Tis the way she has Of saying "that should be done like this, and this Like that!"
The woman stirs me to that point I feel like a carrot in a stew,—I boil so I bump the kettle on all sides!
My dear, Were you as plump as I you would not dare Become so angry.
It would make your stays creak.
Well, I am done.
Fidelio, play me a dirge To put me in good spirits.
Merry music Is sure to make me sad.
'Tis curious A woman like her should have a child like that— So gentle and so pretty-mannered.
Faith,— Hush!
Hush!
Here come the prettiest pair of birds That ever sat together on a bough so close You could not see the sky between.
How now, Snow-White and Rose-Red!
Are you reconciled One to another?
Reconciled, Fidelio?
We had not quarrelled!
 Do not listen to him, Bianca, 'tis but the jingling of his bells.
Do you make a better jest than that At once, or have the clappers cut from them.
Alas, alas,—all the good jests are made.
I made them yesterday.
If that be true, You would best become a wise man for a time, My friend,—there are plenty of wise words not yet said!
I shall say them all tomorrow.
If you do, You will be stoned to death.
Not I.
No one Will hear me.—Well, I am off.—I know an old man Who does not know the road runs past his house; And yet his bees make honey.
 'Tis the one wise fool We have among us.
Oh, here you are, my ducklings!
Always together, like a beggar and a flea!
I looked for you at lunch-time; I forget now What for; but then 'twas a matter of more weight Than laying siege to a city,—la, how time Does carry one on!
An hour is like an ocean, The way it separates you from yourself!— What do you find to talk about all day?
We do not talk all day.
Nay, tis you, Grazia, That talk all day.
We ride, and play at tennis, And row on the lake— I know who does the rowing!
Nay, not by any means!
Bianca rows Nearly as well as I.
And do you ride Nearly as well as she, Bianca?
 Nay.
'Tis an unkind question.
There be few in Fiori Might answer, "Aye."
Her Highness rides like a centaur.
I'd never dare to mount the horse she rides.
What, Harlequin?—La, he's gentle as a kitten!
Though he's a little young, 'tis true, not settled yet In his mind.
As to his mind, 'twere a small matter, Were he a bit more settled in his legs!
I'm afraid of horses, anyway, they are so much Bigger than I am.
Oh, Bianca, horses Are just like people!
Are you afraid of father?— He is bigger than you.
Nay.
But I'd never dare Prod him which way to go!
Oh, la, I would!
Father, this ditch!
This four-foot wall now, father!
And swim the brook beyond!
And is there naught In which Bianca carries off the trophies?
Ay, there is tennis.
She wins from you at tennis?
She flays me, Laura.
She drags me at her racket Nine times around the court!
Why, how is that?— She is not quicker.
Nay, but she grows cool Whilst I grow hot, Carlotta, and freezes me Ere I can melt her!
Is it true, Bianca?
'Tis true I win from her.—Although not always.
What did I come here for?—I must go back To where I started, and think of it again!
 Are you sure that you remember where you started?
—The woman hath a head like a sieve.
And yet, You may be sure 'tis nothing more than the thimble Of the matter she's forgotten.
I never knew her Mislay the thread or the needle of a thing.
We must study now, Beatrice, we really must.
We have not opened a book since yesterday.
La, as for me, I have not opened a book Since yesteryear,—I'd rather open a vein!
Lessons,—troth, I remember well those lessons.
As for what I learned,—troth, that's a different matter, 'Tis curious; the things that one remembers Are foolish things.
One does not know at all Why one remembers them.
There was a blackbird With a broken foot somebody found and tamed And named Euripides!—I can see it now.
Some of the silly rhymes we used to write In the margins of our books, I still remember!
And eating sweets behind the covers of them!
And faces—faces—faces—and a little game We used to play, all marching in a row And singing!—I wish I were a child again.
You are not old, Francesca.
You are very young.
And very beautiful!
I have been beautiful Too many years to be so very young.
How now, Francesca!
Would you have it said You are enamoured of some beardless youth, That so you see the wrinkles suddenly?
Have done!
Have done!
Where shall we study, Bice?
Indoors.
I cannot study out of doors.
I vow I never knew a pair of lovers More constant than those two.
A pair of lovers?
Marry, I find your figure lacking force!
Since when were lovers true?
Oh, peace, Carlotta!
You bear too sharp a weapon against the world,— A split tongue full of poison, in a head That darts at every heel!—I'm going in.
You should not say such things when she is with us, Carlotto.
Is the woman in love?
In love!
She is so far gone she does not know which way To sail,—all shores are equally out of sight.
"What was I doing when the moon stood above?
What did I do?
What did I do?
I lied to a lady that had given me her love,— I swore to be true!
I swore to be true!"
My mistress!
"And what was I doing when the sun stood above?
What did I do?
What did I do?—" By my sacred word, Fidelio, I do not like your song.
Faith, and small wonder!—It is a song that sets the evil eye To staring in upon itself.
What mean you by that, my throaty friend?
I mean to say That, taking it all in all and by and large, You do not care for music.
I do not care For yours, but it is possible Apollo Had a better tenor.
I never heard him sing.
Nay, and how could you?—He died when you were born!
He died, that is, in giving birth to me?
Aye, if you like,—you bear as much resemblance To him as to your mother's husband, surely.
Take care, Fidelio!
So!
Then it angers you Apollo should be deemed your sire!
I told you You did not care for music!
You are a sly fool, My merry friend.
What hide you under the cloak?
Why, 'tis a little patch of snow the sun Would lay too hot a hand on.
By my life,— And what are you that you can keep the sun From shining where it will?
Why, by your life,— And a foul oath it is!—why, by your life, I am a cloud,—that is an easy riddle.
How beautiful it is to sit like this, Snow-White,—to think of much, and to say little.
Ay, it is beautiful.
I shall remember All my life long these evenings that we spent Sitting just here, thinking together.
Rose-Red, It is four years today since first we met.
Did you know that?
Nay, is it?
Four years today.
I liked you from the moment that I saw you, Beatrice!
I you, Bianca.
From the very moment!
I thought you were the prettiest little girl That I had ever seen.
I was afraid Of you, a little, at first,—you were a Princess, You see.
But you explained that being a Princess Was much the same as anything else.
'Twas nice, You said, when people were nice, and when they were not nice 'Twas hateful, just the same as everything else.
And then I saw your dolls, and they had noses All scratched, and wigs all matted, just like mine, Which reassured me even more!—I still, though, Think of you as a Princess; the way you do things Is much more wonderful than the way I do them!— The way you speak to the servants, even the way You pick up something that you drop.
You goose!
'Tis not because I'm a princess you feel that way— I've always thought the same thing about you!— The way you draw your gloves on is to me More marvelous than the way the sun comes up!
Oh, lud,—how droll we are!
Oh, I shall die Of laughing!
Think you anyone else, Rose-Red, Was ever half so silly?
I dare wager There be a thousand, in this realm alone, Some even sillier!
Here comes Fidelio!
 Fidelio, sing to us,—there is no nightingale Abroad tonight, save you.
And the night cries For music!
Sing, Fidelio!
I have no thorn To lean my breast on.
I've been happy all day, And happiness ever made a crow of me.
Sing, none the less,—unless you have a cold, Which is a singer's only rock of refuge.
You have no cold, or you would not be happy.
So sing.
"Oh, little rose-tree, bloom!
Summer is nearly over.
The dahlias bleed and the phlox is seed, Nothing's left of the clover, And the path of the poppy no one knows,— I would blossom if I were a rose!
Summer for all your guile Will brown in a week to autumn, And launched leaves throw a shadow below Over the brook's clear bottom, And the chariest bud the year can boast Be brought to bloom by the chastening frost!
Oh, little rose-tree, bloom!"
Do you know what I am thinking, Bice?
You're wondering where we'll be ten years from now, Or something of that nature.
Ay, I was wondering Which would be married first, and go away, And would we still be friends.
Oh, do you doubt it, Snow-White?
Nay, nay,—I doubt it not, my dear,— But I was wondering.
I am suddenly sad, I know not why.
I do not wish to leave you Ever.
I know.
I cannot bear To think of parting.
We have been happy these four years Together, have we not?
Oh, Beatrice!
 Nay, do not weep!—Come, you must go to bed.
You are tired tonight.
We rode too far today.
Oh, you are tired, tired, you are very tired.
You must be rocked to sleep, and tucked in bed, And have your eyelids kissed to make you dream Of fairies!
Come, dear, come.
Oh, I do love you, Rose-Red!
You are so sweet!
Oh, I do love you So much!—so much!
I never loved anyone The way that I love you!
There is nobody In all the world so wonderful as you!
You'll not be able to get out of that, I think, my girl, with both your castles gone.
Be not so sure!—I have a horse still, father, And in a strong position: if I move him here, You lose your bishop; and if you take my bishop, You lose your queen.
True, but with my two rooks Set here, where I can push them back and forth, My king is safe till worms come in and eat him.
What say you then to this?—Will you take this pawn, Or will you not?
Od's bones!—where did that come from?
La, would you lose your eyesight, both of you?— Fumbling about those chessmen in the dark?
You, Beatrice, at least, should have more wit!
"At least"—hm!—Did you hear her say, "at least," Bice, my daughter?
Ay.
But it is true The twilight comes before one knows it.
Ay.
'Tis true, but unimportant.
Nevertheless, I am a tractable old fellow.—Look you, I will but stay to map the lay of the pieces Upon this bit of letter.
'Tis from a king Who could not tell the bishop from the board,— And yet went blind at forty.—A little chess By twilight, mark you, and all might have been well.
Oh,—I've been looking everywhere for you?
For me?
Nay, mother,—for Beatrice.
Bice, The rose is out at last upon that bush That never blossomed before,—and it is white As linen, just as I said 'twould be!
Why, the bud Was redder than a radish!
Ay, I know.
But the blossom's white, pure white.
Come out and see!
Would you like to see it, mother?
Nay, not now, child.
Some other time.
Father, we'll end the game Tomorrow; and do you not be scheming at it All night!
Nay, I will not unfold the chart.
But you remember well enough without; Promise me not to think of it.
I' faith, You are a desperate woman.
Ay, I promise.
I tell you, as I've told you often before, Lorenzo, 'tis not good for two young girls To be so much together!
As you say, Octavia.
For myself, I must confess It seems a natural thing, enough, that youth Should seek out youth.
And if they are better pleased Talking together than listening to us, I find it not unnatural.
What have we To say to children?—They are as different From older folk as fairies are from them.
"Talking together," Lorenzo!
What have they To talk about, save things they might much better Leave undiscussed?—you know what I mean,—lovers, And marriage, and all that—if that is all!
One never knows—it is impossible To hear what they are saying; they either speak In whispers, or burst out in fits of laughter At some incredible nonsense.
There is nothing So silly as young girls at just that age.— At just Bianca's age, that is to say.
As for the other,—as for Beatrice, She's older than Bianca, and I'll not have her Putting ideas into my daughter's head!
Fear not, my love.
Your daughter's head will doubtless, In its good time, put up its pretty hair, Chatter, fall dumb, go moping in the rain, Be turned by flattery, be bowed with weeping, Grow grey, and shake with palsy over a staff,— All this, my love, as empty of ideas As even the fondest mother's heart could wish.
You mock me, sir?
I am but musing aloud, As is my fashion.—And indeed, my dear, What is the harm in lovers-and-all-that That virtuous maidens may not pass the time With pretty tales about them?—After all, Were it not for the years of looking forward to it And looking back upon it, love would be Only the commonest bird-song in the hedge,— And men would have more time to think,—and less To think about.
That may be.
But young girls Should not be left alone too much together.
They grow too much attached.
They grow to feel They cannot breathe apart.
It is unhealthy.
It may be true.
But as for me, whom youth Abandoned long ago, I look on youth As something fresh and sweet, like a young green tree, Though the wind bend it double.—'Tis you, 'tis I, 'Tis middle age the fungus settles on.
Your head is full of images.
You have No answers.
I shall do as I spoke of doing, And separate them for a little while, Six months, maybe a year.
I shall send Bianca Away within a fortnight.
That will cure them.
I know.
I know.
Such friendships do not last.
That is a merry face you wear, my Guido!
Now that the young King Mario visits the court And walks all morning in the woods with the Princess, Or gives her fencing lessons,—upon my word, You are as gay as a gallows!
She is never Alone with him.
Laura—Carlotta—someone Is always there.
Ah—ah—but even so, No matter who is there, I tell you, lovers Are always alone!
Why do you say these things, Giovanni?
Because I love you, you lean wolf, And love to watch you snuff the air.
My friend, There was a time I thought it all ambition With you, a secret itching to be king— And not so secret, either—an open plot To marry a girl who will be Queen some morning.
But now at times I wonder.
You have a look As of a man that's nightly gnawed by rats, The very visage of a man in love.
Is it not so?
I do not know, Giovanni.
I know I have a passion in my stomach So bitter I can taste it on my tongue.
She hates me.
And her hatred draws me to her As the moon draws the tide.
You are like a cat— There never was a woman yet that feared you And shunned you, but you leapt upon her shoulder!
Well, I'll be off.
The prettiest girl in Fiori,— Unless it be Her Highness, waits for me By a fountain.
All day long she sells blue plums, And in the evening what she has left of them She gives to me!
You should love simply, Guido, As I do.
 Guido!
Guido!
Who calls me?
Guido!
Francesca!
Why do you follow me here?
You know I do not wish to see you!
Do not be angry.
'Tis half a week since you have spoken to me, And over a week since you have so much as laid Your hand upon my arm!
And do you think, Loving you as I do, I can do without you, Forever, Guido, and make no sign at all?
I know you said you did not wish to see me Ever again,—but it was only a quarrel— And we have quarreled before!
It was not a quarrel.
I am tired of you, Francesca.
You are too soft.
You weep too much.
I do not weep the less For having known you.
So;—it will save you tears, then To know me less.
Oh, Guido, how your face Is changed,—I cannot think those are the eyes That looked into my eyes a month ago!
What's come between us?
Nothing has come between us.
It is the simple snapping of a string Too often played upon.
Ah!—but I know Who snapped it!
It will do you little good To look at her,—she'll never look at you!
Be silent a moment!—Unless you would be silent Longer!
Indeed!
I shall speak out my mind!
You go beyond yourself!
There is proportion Even in a nature like my own, that's twisted From too much clinging to a crooked tree!
And this is sure: if you no longer love me, You shall no longer strike me!
Beatrice!
Wait for me!
Wait!
Not I!
Who does not run?
As fast as I run, shall be left behind me!
They are coming here!
I do not wish to see them!
Oh, Guido!
 Beatrice, you run like a boy!
You whistle like a boy!
And upon my word, You are the only girl I ever played At jousting with, that did not hold her sword As if it were a needle!
Which of us, Think you, when we are married, will be King?
When we are married!
Sir, I'll have you know There's an ogre to be tamed, a gem to be pried From out a dragon's forehead, and three riddles To be solved, each tighter than the last, before A Princess may be wed!
Even by a King?
For Kings the rules are sterner!—One more riddle, And a mirror that will show her always young.
And if I do these things, then, will you have me, Rose-Red?
Maybe.
And if you do not do them, Maybe.
Come—I will race you to the bridge!
Nay, not so fast!—Have you no wish to be Beside me, ever, that you are forever running Ahead?
Indeed, if you would have the truth It has come into my mind more times than once It would be sweet to be beside you often.
Rose-Red!
Come—I will race you to the bridge!
You, Pierrot, are you not a little thick For such a sorrowful fellow?
Nay, indeed!
Sorrow may come to all.
And 'tis amazing How much a man may live through and keep fat.
Ho!
Now he stumbles!
Look you, Pantaloon, If you were not so learned i' the head You might know better where to put your feet!
'Tis curious how it addles a man's bones To think too much.
Nay, truth.
Wise men were ever Awkward in the legs.
Have at him, Polichinello.
Lay on!
Lay on!
Leave not a nail of him!
Dog!
Would you have him write a book about you?
Spit him i' the liver!
It is his only organ!
Nay, it is cruel.
I cannot look at it.
It is but play.
Ay, but 'tis cruel play.
To be so mocked at!—Come, take heart, good Doctor!
'Tis a noisy fellow, but light withal!—Blow at him!
She has the softest heart that ever I saw In a hard woman.
It may be, seeing she has pity For one rogue, she has pity for another!
Mark you, my Guido, there is hope yet!
Nay, There's not.
I have opened up my mind to her, And she will none of me.
That was the last thing You should have done!—Speak,—did she give for answer She loves the King?
Not she.
She gave for answer She does not love the Duke.
Ah, pretty lady!
La, she is fickle!
How she turns from one face To another face,—and smiles into them all!
Oh, ay, but' tis the Pierrot that she loves.
Well done!
Bravo!
A monstrous lively play!
Oh, is it over?—I would it were not over!
And yet it pleased you not!
When it pleased me not, I looked at you.
And when I pleased you not—?
I looked at Harlequin.
However, I saw him But fleetingly.
Pray, was he dark or fair?
Laura!
Who calls?
La, it is only Luigi!
Laura, there'll be a moon tonight.
I' faith, There was a moon last night.
 At ten o'clock, Were I by a certain gate, would you be there?
What say you?
Ay,—if weariness overtook me, And I could not get further!
La, 'tis sun-down!
It would amuse me if I had a lily To carry in my hand.
You there, Carlotta!
You have a long arm,—plunge it in the pool And fish me forth a lily!
Majesty, They close at night.
Well—we will open them.
Go to—I am not a frog!
What did you say?
She says she sees a frog, Your Majesty.
You are mad!
Can you not keep your tongue in your head?
Ay, I can keep it in my cheek.—There's one.
God grant it have an eel at the end of it,— I'll give the dame good measure.
Greeting, madam!
Who greets me?—Ah, it is the Duke.
Good even, Guido.
You seek an audience with me?
Nay—nay—but if you send away your women,— We shall be more alone.
You may leave me now, Laura, Francesca—all of you—and you would best go in At an early hour, instead of walking the gardens All night; I would have you with your wits About you in the morning.
Oh, indeed?
You would best go in yourself, lest the dew rust you, You sauce-pan!
 Now, my good sir,—you may speak.
It is a long time, is it not, your daughter Is absent from the court?
Why say you that?
Why but to pass the time, till she returns?
Nay, Guido.
That is well enough for some, But not for me.
I know the slant of your fancy; 'Tis not in that direction.
Yet me thinks The sooner she is back again at court The happier for us both.
"Us both?"
What "both?"
You Madam, and myself.
And why for me?
Why, are you not her mother?
Hah!
Guido, What festers in your mind?
Do you speak out now, If you await some aid from me.
Madam, I have but this to say: if I were a woman With a marriageable daughter, and a King rode by, I'd have her at the window.
So.
I thought so.
Guido, what think you,—does she love the King,— I mean Lorenzo's daughter?
Ay, she loves him.
And loves he her?
Oh, ay.
He loves the moon, The wind in the cypress trees, his mother's portrait At seventeen, himself, his future children— He loves her well enough.
But had she blue eyes And yellow hair, and were afraid of snakes, He yet might love her more.
You think so, Guido?
I am content to learn you of that mind.
There had occurred to me—some time ago, In fact—a similar fancy.
And already My daughter is well on her way home.
Fidelio, Were you ever in love?
I was never out of it.
But truly?
Well.
I was only out of it What time it takes a man to right himself And once again lose balance.
Ah, indeed, 'Tis good to be in love, I have often noticed, The moment I fall out of love, that moment I catch a cold.
Are you in love, then, now?
Ay, to be sure.
Oh!
Oh!
With whom, Fidelio?
Tell me with whom!
Why, marry, with yourself,— That are the nearest to me,—and by the same troth, The farthest away.
Go to, Fidelio!
I am in earnest, and you trifle with me As if I were a child.
Are you not a child, then?
Not any more.
FID, How so?
I am in love.
Oh—oh—oh, misery, misery, misery, misery!
Why do you say that?
Say what?
"Misery, misery."
It is a song.
A song?
Ay, 'tis a love-song.
Oh, misery, misery, misery, misery, oh!
Nay, sweet Fidelio, be not so unkind!
I tell you, for the first time in my life I am in love!
Do you be mannerly now, And cease to mock me, What would you have me do?
I would have you shake your head, and pat my shoulder, And smile and say, "Godspeed."
Godspeed.
I do not know if I am happy or sad.
But I am greatly moved.
I would Bianca Were here.
I never lacked her near so much As tonight I do, although I lack her always.
She is a long time gone.—If I tell you something, Will you promise not to tell.
Nay, I'll not promise, But I'll not tell.
Fidelio, I do love so The King from Lagoverde!
I do so love him!
Godspeed, Godspeed.
Ay, it is passing strange; Last week I was a child, but now I am not.
And I begin my womanhood with weeping; I know not why.—La, what a fool I am!
'Tis over.
Sing, Fidelio.
Would you a gay song, My Princess?
Ay.—And yet—nay, not so gay.
A simple song, such as a country-boy Might sing his country-sweetheart.—Is it the moon Hath struck me, do you think?
I swear by the moon I am most melancholy soft, and most Outrageous sentimental!
Sing, dear fool.
"Butterflies are white and blue In this field we wander through.
Suffer me to take your hand.
Death comes in a day or two.
All the things we ever knew Will be ashes in that hour.
Mark the transient butterfly, How he hangs upon the flower.
Suffer me to take your hand.
Suffer me to cherish you Till the dawn is in the sky.
Whether I be false or true, Death comes in a day or two."
Strew we flowers on their pathway!
Bride and bride-groom, go you sweetly.
There are roses on your pathway.
Bride and bride-groom, go you sweetly.
Sweetly live together.
How beautiful, Anselmo!
Where did you find them?
Close by the brook.
You gathered all there were?
Not by one hundredth part.
Nay, is it true?
We must have more of them!
And are they fragrant As well?
Ay, by my heart, they are so sweet I near to fainted climbing the bank with them.
Oh!
Ah!
How drowsily sweet!
Oh, sweet!
What fragrance!
La, by my lung!
I am as out of breath As a babe new-born!
Whew!
Let me catch the air!
How hot the sun is getting.
'Tis nigh noon, I think.
'Tis noon.
We must be starting back.
Not till I get my breath.
Come,—I will fan you.
 Tis good—'tis very good—oh, peace—oh, slumber— Oh, all good things!
You are a proper youth.
You are a zephyr.
I would have you fan me Till you fall dead.
I tell you when it comes To gathering flowers, much is to be said For spreading sheets on the grass,—it gives you less The backache.
Nobly uttered, my sweet bird.
Yet brides must have bouquets.
And sit at home, Nursing complexions, whilst I gather them, Nay, out upon you now, Carlotta!
Cease now To grumble so,—'tis such a pretty day!
And weddings mean a ball!
And one may dance all night At weddings!
Till one needs must dance to bed, Because one cannot walk there!
And one eats Such excellent food!
And drinks such excellent wine!
And seldom will you see a bride and bridegroom More beautiful and gracious, or whom garlands Do more become.
'Tis so,—upon my sword!— Which I neglected to bring with me—'tis so, Upon Anselmo's sword!
Nay, look you, Laura!
You must not fall asleep!
Have done, you devil!
Is it a poppy that you have there?
Look you, We must be starting back!
 Ay, that we must.
Where are the others?
Scattered all about.
I will call to them.
Hola!
You fauns and dryads!
Where are you?
Here!
Here!
Is it time to go?
Come this way!
We are starting back!
We are coming!
We'll come in a moment!
I cannot bear to leave This place!
A thousand greetings, Clara!
Lucia, a thousand greetings!
How now, Luigi!
I know you, man, despite this soft disguise!
You are no flower-girl!
I am a draught-horse, That's what I am, for four unyielding women!
Were I a flower-girl, I'd sell the lot For a bit of bread and meat—I am so hungry I could eat a butterfly!
What ho.
Francesca!
I have not seen you since the sun came up!
This is not I,—I shall not be myself Till it goes down!
Oh, la, what lovely lilies!
Be tender with them—I risked my life to get them!
Where were they?
Troth, I do not know.
I think They were in a dragon's mouth.
No one is going that cannot go afoot.
I have enough to carry!
Nay; take me too!
I am a little thing.
What does it matter— One flower more?
You are a thousand flowers, Sweet Laura,—you are a meadow full of them— I'll bring a wagon for you.
Come.
Come home.
"Strew we flowers on their pathway," etc.
Look at me, Rose-Red.
Am I pretty enough, Think you, to marry a King?
You are too pretty.
There is no justice in it.
Marry a cobbler And make a king of him.
It is unequal,— Here is one beggarly boy king in his own right, And king by right of you.
Mario is not A beggarly boy!
Nay, tell me truly, Beatrice, What do you think of him?
La, by my soul!
Have I not told you what I think of him A thousand times?
He is graceful enough, I tell you, And hath a well-shaped head.
Nay, is that all?
Nay, hands and feet he hath, like any other.
Oh, out upon you for a surly baggage!
Why will you tease me so?
You do not like him, I think.
Snow-White!
Forgive me!
La, indeed, I was but jesting!
By my sacred word, These brides are serious folk.
I could not bear To wed a man that was displeasing to you.
Loving him as I do, I could not choose But wed him, if he wished it, but 'twould hurt me To think he did not please you.
Let me, then, Set your sweet heart at rest.
You could not find In Christendom a man would please me more.
Then I am happy.
Aye, be happy, child.
Why do you call me child?
Faith, 'tis the season O' the year when I am older than you.
Besides A bride is always younger than a spinster.
A spinster!
Do you come here to me, Rose-Red, Whilst I pinch you smartly!
You, Arianna, push me Her Highness over here, that I may pinch her!
Nay, is it finished?
Aye, 'tis very well.
Though not so well, Loretta, as many a day When I was doing nothing!—Nay, my girl, 'Tis well enough.
He will take me as I am Or leave me as I was.—You may come back In half an hour, if you are grieved about it, And do it again.
But go now,—all of you.
I wish to be alone.
Not you.
Oh, Rose-Red, I trust 'twill not be long before I see you As happy as you see me now!
Indeed, I could not well be happier than I am.
You do not know, maybe, how much I love you.
Ah, but I do,—I have a measure for it!
Ay, for today you have.
But not for long.
They say a bride forgets her friends,—she cleaves so To her new lord.
It cannot but be true.
You will be gone from me.
There will be much To drive me from your mind.
Shall I forget, then, When I am old, I ever was a child?
I tell you I shall never think of you Throughout my life, without such tenderness As breaks the heart,—and I shall think of you Whenever I am most happy, whenever I am Most sad, whenever I see a beautiful thing.
You are a burning lamp to me, a flame The wind cannot blow out, and I shall hold you High in my hand against whatever darkness.
You are to me a silver bell in a tower.
And when it rings I know I am near home.
Mario!
I have a message for you!—Nay, You need not hang your head and shun me, Mario, Because you loved me once a little and now Love somebody else much more.
The going of love Is no less honest than the coming of it.
It is a human thing.
Oh, Beatrice!
What can I say to you?
Nay, but indeed.
Say nothing.
All is said.
I need no words To tell me you have been troubled in your heart, Thinking of me.
What can I say to you!
I tell you, my dear friend, you must forget This thing that makes you sad.
I have forgotten, In seeing her so happy, that ever I wished For happiness myself.
Indeed, indeed, I am much happier in her happiness Than if it were my own; 'tis doubly dear, I feel it in myself, yet all the time I know it to be hers, and am twice glad.
I could be on my knees to you a lifetime, Nor pay you half the homage is your due.
Pay me no homage, Mario,—but if it be I have your friendship, I shall treasure it.
That you will have always.
Then you will promise me Never to let her know.
I never told her How it was with us, or that I cherished you More than another.
It was on my tongue to tell her The moment she returned, but she had seen you Already on the bridge as she went by, And had leaned out to look at you, it seems, And you were looking at her,—and the first words She said, after she kissed me, were, "Oh, sister, I have looked at last by daylight on the man I see in my dreams!"
Did she say that?
Ay, that Was what she said.—By which I knew, you see, My dream was over,—it could not but be you.
So that I said no word, but my quick blood Went suddenly quiet in my veins, and I felt Years older than Bianca.
I drew her head Down to my shoulder, that she might not see my face, And she spoke on, and on.
You must not tell her, Even when you both are old, and there is nothing To do but to remember.
She would be withered With pity for me.
She holds me very dear.
I promise it, Rose-Red.
And oh, believe me, I said no word to you last year that is not As true today!
I hold you still the noblest Of women, and the bravest.
I have not changed.
Only last year I did not know I could love As I love now.
Her gentleness has crept so Into my heart, it never will be out.
That she should turn to me and cling to me And let me shelter her, is the great wonder Of the world.
You stand alone.
You need no shelter, Rose-Red.
It may be so.
Will you forgive me?
I had not thought of that.
If it will please you, Ay, surely.—And now, the reason for my coming: I have a message for you, of such vast import She could not trust it to a liv'ried page, Or even a courier.
She bids me tell you She loves you still, although you have been parted Since four o'clock.
Did she say that?
Ay, Mario.
I must return to her.
It is not long now Till she will leave me.
She will never leave you, She tells me, in her heart.
Did she say that?
Ay, that she did, and I was jealous of you One moment, till I called myself a fool.
Nay, Mario, she does not take from you To give to me; and I am most content She told you that.
I will go now.
Farewell, Mario!
Nay, we shall meet again, Beatrice!
Be still, or I will heave a plate at you!
Nay, gentle Laura, heave not the wedding-crockery, At the wedding-guest!
Behold me on my knees To tell the world I love you like a fool!
Get up, you oaf!
Or here's a platter of gravy Will add the motley to your folly!
Hold her, Some piteous fop, that liketh not to see Fine linen smeared with goose!
Oh, gracious Laura, I never have seen a child sucking an orange But I wished an orange, too.
This wedding irks me Because 'tis not mine own.
Shall we be married Tuesday or Wednesday?
Are you in earnest, Luigi?
Ay, that I am, if never I was before.
La, I am lost!
I am a married woman!
Water!—Nay, wine will do!
On Wednesday, then.
I'll have it as far off as possible.
Well met, Fidelio!
Give us a song!
Not I!
Why, is this?
You, that are dripping with song Weekdays, are dry of music for a wedding?
I have a headache.
Go and sit in a tree, And make your own songs.
Nay, Fidelio.
String the sweet strings, man!
Strike the pretty strings!
Give us the silver strings!
Nay then, I will that!
Here be the strings, my merry gentlemen!
Do you amuse yourselves with tying knots in them And hanging one another!—I have a headache.
What ails him, think you?
Troth, I have no notion.
What ho, good Grazia!
I hear my uncle Is ill again!
Where heard you that, you raven?
Marry, I forget.
Is't true?
It is as false As that you have forgotten where you heard it.
Were you the heir to his power, which I bless God You're not!—he'd live to hide the throne from you Full many a long day yet!—Nay, pretty Guido, Your cousin is not yet Queen,—and when she is—Faith, She weareth a wide petticoat,—there'll be Scant room for you beside her!
 None the less I do believe the king is ill.
Who told you?
His wife.
She is much exercised about him.
'Tis like enough.
This woman would rather lie Than have her breakfast served to her in bed.
Ay.
She is here.
I thought she would be here.
There are so many people by his bed Even now, she cannot be alone with him.
Is there no hope?
Nay, there is none.
'Tis over.
He was a kind old man.
Come, let us go, And leave her to herself.
Nay, Mario.
I must not leave her.
She will sit like that All night, unless I bid her come away, And put her into bed.
Will you come to me After she sleeps?
Ay.
If she sleeps, And if not?
I could not leave her.
Bianca, do you love me?
Ay, Mario!
Ah, but not as I love you!
You do not mean that, Mario; you know How much I love you.
But I could not be happy Thinking of her awake in the darkness, weeping, And all alone.
Oh, my sweet love.
It may be She will sleep.
I shall be waiting for you.
 Sister.
One, two, three, The dough is in the oven!
One, two, three, The bread is on the board!
One, two, three.
The dough is in the oven!
One, two, three, The bread is on the board!
One, two, three, All follow me!
Good-even, Giovanitta.
Those are beautiful Onions you have there.
Ay, it has been a good year For onions.
I am taking seven.
Each year, You buy another onion!
Faith, each year I have another mouth to thrust it in!
Beautiful carrots, too, you have.
Ay, carrots Are well enough.
One cannot complain.
'Tis a good year For carrots.
'Tis a good year for many things.
Prices are low,—but not too low for profit.
And there are fewer taxes than there once were On things one cannot live without.
'Tis a good Queen We have, it must be granted.
Ay, and a wise one.
And pretty, too.
Ho, ho!
When did you see her?
This morning, mother.
I was at the edge of the wood With Beppo, when they rode by to the hunt, Talking together, and laughing.
And the horses With feet like this!
And glittering in the sunshine In a thousand places, mother!
I wanted to tell you When we returned, but you had gone to the brook With the linen.
They were so near us we could hear them Talking.
And hear the horses breathe!
What said they?
Well, one of them said—what was the name?
Anselmo.
Oh, ay.
She said, "Anselmo, am I getting thinner Do you think?
If I be not thinner than I was at starting, I shall descend at once!
I like not this; It chatters my teeth."
And then she said— What said she?
Oh, ay,—about the boat.
She said, "Next time I shall go fishing instead of hunting.
A boat Hath a more mannerly gait!"
There was one horse, mother, That was all white!
There was not one hair upon him That was not white!
And who was riding that horse?
A man.
And riding well.
He was dressed in green, And had a yellow beard.
And there was a lady With hair the color of Adelina's, bright Like fire.
She was dressed in blue, and was most beautiful.
And she was mounted on a dappled mare.
But, oh, it was the Queen that was more lovely— Than any of the rest!
How did you know, now, It was the Queen?
Nay, but you could not help But know!
She was not laughing like the rest,— Just smiling; and I would not have been afraid To toss a flower to her from the wood, If I had had a flower.
You knew her, though, Because she was in scarlet.
All the world knows She wears a scarlet mantle!
Nay, if that were all, It might have been the Pope!
I would it had been.
I never saw the Pope.
You never saw The Queen until this morning!—Mother, she rides Clothed like a man, almost!
With sword at side!
And, oh, the sword had a jeweled—what is the name of it?
Scabbard, of course!
A jeweled scabbard, mother!
I wish I were a queen.
Ho, you would make A proper queen, with that droll nose of yours!
I know a boy who likes my nose!
Ho, ho!
He must be a hunch-back!
You must not tease her, Beppo.
I wish I were queen.
If I were a queen, You would not dare to say my nose is droll.
It would be, all the same.
You should be content With what you have, not cry to rise beyond it.
It is a sin to covet.
Being a queen, My bird, is not all riding to the hunt Of a sunny morning.
Nay, 'tis riding back At times, of a rainy night, to such a burden Of cares as simple folk have little mind of.
I'd rather have a queen's cares than my own.
Ho, ho!
Your cares!
What cares have you?
I have A brother that will be teasing me all times!
'Tis cares enough for one, I tell you.
Beppo!
Come help me fetch the milk!
Oh, Mister Beppo, Your sweetheart calls you!
Run and fetch the milk!
Come in to supper, children!
Oh, not just yet!
Father's not home yet!
You need not wait for him.
May we come out again?
Ay, for a time.
Till it gets dark.
'Tis dark now, almost.
Hush!
She does not know it.
'Tis dark now.
Ay, I know.
I let them play a little after dark Sometimes, when the weather's fine.
I would not have them Afraid of shadows.
They think I do not know Darkness from light.
There's father now!
I see him!
He is late home today.
I cannot think What may have held him.
'Twill be deep night already In the woods.
Down!
Down!
Do you run back to your mother!
See you not I am in haste?—Hang not upon me!
La!
He is in a temper!
I never knew him So out of patience with them.
He is hungry, maybe.
He is often hungry, but I never knew him So out of patience.
 Why do you weep, my heart?
Father is someone else tonight.
He pushed me!
Good-even, Cesco.
Look you, Leonora, Have we a bed fit for a queen to lie in?
Nay, faith!
Not we!
She can have my bed, mother.
Ay, true.
There is a bed in my house, Cesco.
What will the queen do here?
I would indeed She had let us know that she was coming!
The Queen Knew not herself.
Nor is she coming of herself.
They are bringing her,—on a litter of crossed boughs, She is not dead?
Nay.
Wounded in the arm A little, and in a swoon.
But the young King Of Lagoverde is no more!
How so?
I tell you my two eyes have looked this day On a sad and useless thing!—A fine lad, young, And strong, and beautiful as a lad may be, And king of a fair country, thrust from horse By a foul blow, and sprawled upon the ground,— Legs wide asunder, fist full of brown mud, Hair in his eyes,—most pitiful unkingly!
Bring me a mug of wine, good wife!
 You, Gilda!
There is a queen you would not be tonight, I'll warrant you,—the Queen of Lagoverde, With her two fatherless babes!
Nay, now, good Cesco, What is this matter?
You'll know it quick enough.
They will be bringing the queen here ere I have breath To tell you.
They are coming by the road, I took the mountain-path, and ran.
I must hasten To put fresh sheets on.
Look you,—listen well If he should talk, and tell me afterwards.
 Here comes Horatio!
The boats are in.
A good day, husband?
Ay, a heavy day.
What think you of that?—A big one, eh?—Came in With a school of little fish,—too greedy that time!
What happens here?—The air is full of breathing!
Cesco will tell you.
In a word 'tis this: Today the Queen of Fiori, Returning from the hunt, is set upon By brigands; where at the King of Lagoverde, Being hunting in that quarter and hearing cries, Comes up to give his aid; in rendering which He gives his life as well, and at this moment, On other men's legs, goes heavily home to supper.
The Queen of Fiori, wounded, and in a swoon Only less deep than death itself, comes this way.
Ay, here they come!
 Make way, make way, good people— Fall back a little—leave a clear space—give air!
Who has a bed that we may lay her on?
She cannot leave this place tonight.
This way, sir.
Hist, Beppo!
Ay?
Heard you not something fall, When they picked her up again?
Ay, that I did.
What was it, think you?
Nay, 'twas nearer here.
I have it.—'Tis her sword!
The Queen's?
Ay,—truly.
How beautiful!
Look,—there is blood on it!
And so the fairy laid a spell on her: Henceforth she should be ugly as a toad.
But the good fairy, seeing this was done, And having in no wise power to alter this, Made all toads beautiful.
They are not beautiful Now, mother!
That was in another country!— What country, mother?
 Where is father, mother?— I have not seen him in so many days!
Father is gone away.
Will he come back?
Nay.
He will not come back.
But we shall go Where he is.
Soon?
God grant it may be soon!
Now—-shall we play a game?
Bianca.
Ay.
It is a folly to remain indoors Like this.
You should be out in the sunshine.
Nay.
I have no business with the sunshine.
Ah, My daughter, say not so!—The children, then,— They have much need of it, and they have need Of you, at the same time.
Take them without.
I do not wish to be in the sunshine.
LITTLE SNOW- Mother, Come out of doors!
You see, now!
Do you run out, dears, And play at ball.
Mother will join you later.
Where is my ball?
Nay, do you not remember?
We put it in the ear of the stone griffin, Because he hears too much.
Ay, so we did!
Come on, Rose-Red!
 It is a curious thing This friend of yours you rate so monstrous high Has not come nigh you in your sore affliction!
I beg you not to speak of that again, Mother.
'Tis the third time today you have said that, Or hinted at it.
And I answer always, "There is some reason for it," as I should answer Though you cried daily till the day of doom, "It is a curious thing!"
There is some reason, There is some good reason why she does not come.
Oh, ay, I doubt it not!
But there are reasons And reasons!
And what am I to learn from that?
'Tis scarce by reason of too much love for you She leaves you friendless in your greatest need.
I cannot say.
'Tis one thing or another.
You have no words can turn me to believe She has forgotten me, or loves me less.
'Tis a big thing, to leave me thus alone,— And there is some big reason.
Ay.
Oh, ay.
'Tis possible she grieves for Mario's death No less than you, Ay, it is possible.
I mind she told me on my marriage-day She was as happy as I.
'Tis a curious thing, When he was here she came to see you often, But now that he is gone comes not at all.
Nay, what evil thing Is in your mind, gives you that evil smile?
Only a little thought.
A little thought, I'll warrant you!—You'd have me to believe She loved my husband?
Ay, I know she loved him.
It is a lie!
How dare you say I lie!
Oh, do not be so proud!
Let us speak truth At length, a little!
We are so garnished up With courtesies, so over-sauced and seasoned, We cannot taste each other!
Why do you tell me A thing like that?—-You have no love for me!
I love you too much—you are the only thing I do love!
Nay, it is not love of me For my own self.
Else would you do the thing Would make me happiest.
You know how I have loved her, Since we were children.
You could not be to me What she was; one forgets too many things.
You could not know my thought.
I loved you dearly; But you were hard to love; one never knew Whether you would be hot or cold to touch.
Whilst she and I,—oh, we were two young trees So nearly of a height we had the same world Ever within our vision!—Yet all these years, Even from the time we first went to Fiori, You have been bearing me your little tales,— "She had done this and that, she was thus and so—", Seeking to stir and poison the clear water Of my deep love for her!
And now this thing.
Which is not true.
But if it had been true, It would not be so out of all reason cruel As that you should have told me of it now.
Nay, do not weep.
All day 'tis one of us Making the other weep.
We are two strange, Unhappy women.
Come, let us be at peace.
Mother, farewell a little while.
I go now To her, seeing that she does not come to me.
But not to question her, not to demand, "How comes it this?
What can you say to that?"
Only to sit beside her, as in the old days, And let her lay her quiet on my heart.
"Let the little birds sing, Let the little lambs play.
Spring is here, and so 'tis spring,— But not in the old way.
I recall a place Where a plum-tree grew,— There you lifted up your face And blossoms covered you.
If the little birds sing, And the little lambs play, Spring is here, and so 'tis spring,— But not in the old way."
It is a pretty song.
There be some things That even the tortured heart's profoundest anguish Cannot bring down from their high place.
Music Is one of them.
 Now, will you drink this broth, Or will you not?
I swear upon my shroud— And 'tis a solemn oath—I never nursed So vaporous a patient!—Come, my bird!
Nay, Nurse, I cannot.
Oh, alackaday!
What shall I do with you?
Come now, and drink me The pretty broth, my dear!
I will drink it later.
'Tis too hot.
Ay, and in a moment 'twill be Too cold!
And you'll not drink it!
I could cry!
Fidelio, as you love me, do you drink this, And quickly, man!
Oh, my dear mistress!
Drink!
I best would leave a little, else she'll know 'Twas never you.
Ay, so you would.
I' faith, It is a knave's trick, but I cannot touch it.
Go now, Fidelio, ere she come again.
Rose-Red.
Rose-Red, dear sister!
Oh, my heart!
Why do you weep?
Oh, no!
Oh, God above!
Go back!
Go back!
Beatrice, are you mad?
'Tis I, Bianca.
Ay, I know 'tis you.
And you must go away.
You are mad, my dear!
I would I were.
For madmen have their moments Of light into the brain.—Hear me.
Bianca, You must return at once to Lagoverde, And come to me no more, and think of me No more.
Ay.
I will go.
But ere I go Tell me you do not love me, 'Tis apparent You do not.
I but wish to hear the words.
Nay, that I will not say.
It would be well, To say it, and let it be.
But I'll not say it, It is not true.
You love me still?
I love you More than all else on earth.
But I have wronged you So hugely that I cannot think of it And stand here talking with you—I am ill— You must pardon me—I have been very ill— Then it is true?
Ay, it is true!
Who told you?
My mother told me.
I said it was not true.
But if 'tis true—I pity you, Rose-Red, I pity him.
I pity us all together.
Ah, I can see it now!—the quiet road In the deep wood's gathering darkness, the reins loose On the horses' necks, that nodded, nodded, and we Speaking from time to time, and glad to think Of home,—and suddenly out of nowhere,—fury, And faces, and long swords, and a great noise!
And even as I reached to draw my sword, The arm that held the scabbard set on fire, As if the sleeve were burning!—and my horse Backing into the trees, my hair caught, twisted, Torn out by the roots!
Then from the road behind A second fury!
And I turned, confused, Outraged with pain, and thrust,—and it was Mario!
What are you saying?
What are you saying?
What is this You are telling me?
That it was you?
Your hand—?
Oh, God have mercy upon me!
Let me go!
Snow-White!
Snow-White!—farewell!
Oh, God have mercy!
Nay, is that true, Anselmo?
Aye, 'tis true.
But no one saw save me, I drew her sword Out of his heart and thrust it in its scabbard, Where she lay senseless.
Oh, unhappy Queen!
Ay, she does not forget.
Has it not struck you She rides no more?
Her black horse stands in stable, Eating his head off.
It is two years now Since she has visited Lagoverde; and the Queen Of Lagoverde comes not nigh this place.
There's not the reason that there was to come Before Octavia's death.
Nay, 'tis not that.
Think you that Beatrice told her?
Ay, I doubt it not.
'Tis hard.
They were close friends.
And since that day her hand upon the scepter Trembles,—and Guido sees.
She goes too much Among the people, nursing them.
She loves them; Their griefs are hers, their hearts are hers, as well.
But Guido has a following in this court That hangs upon his word, and he has taught them Her gentleness is weakness, and her love Faint-hearted womanish whims, till they are eager To pull her down, and see a man in place of her.
Her throne is like a raft upon a sea, That shifts, and rights itself, and may go down At any moment.
The more especially For all these drowning beggars that cling to it, Chattering for help.
She will not strike them off.
Unhappy Queen.
And there's a storm approaching, If ever I smelled wind.
I fear it Luigi.
How do I know you love her still?—I know, The way you fall a-tapping with your fingers, Or plucking at your eye-brows, if her name Is spoken, or she move across the court.
How do I know?—Oh, Guido, have I learned you So little, then, in all these bitter years?
I know you very well.
You know too much I'll have an end of this, I tell you!
Ay.
You've told me that before.—An end of what?
What is this thing you'll put this mighty end to?
'Fore God I would I know.
Could I but name it, I might have power to end it then, myself!
I'll have an end of these soft words at twilight, And these bad mornings full of bile!
I'll have an end Of all this spying on me!
'Tis not so.
I do not spy upon you.
But I see you Bigger than other men, and your least gesture— A giant moving rocks.—Oh, Guido, tell me You do not love her!
Even though I know You lie, I will believe you,—for I must!
Nay, I am done with you.
I will tell you nothing.
Out of my way!—I have that on my mind Would crush your silly skull like the shell of an egg!
Od's body, will you keep your ugly claws From scratching at my sleeve?
Oh, God—oh, God— I would whatever it is, that were over.
"Rain comes down And hushes the town.
And where is the voice that I heard crying?
Snow settles Over the nettles.
Where is the voice that I heard crying?
Sand at last On the drifting mast.
And where is the voice that I heard crying?
Earth now On the busy brow.
And where is the voice that I heard crying?"
The first case to be heard is that of Lisa, A widow with two small children, who resides Near the Duke's wood, and has been caught in the act Of cutting trees there, and hauling them home to burn.
Stand, Lisa.
You are a widow, I am told.
With two small children.
Ay, your Majesty, Two little boys.
I know another widow, Lisa, With two small children,—but hers are little girls.
Have you been cutting trees on the Duke's land?
No, Majesty.
I could not cut a tree.
I have no axe.
And are you strong enough To break a tree with your hands?
No, Majesty.
I see.
What do you do, then?
There must be Some reason for this plaint.
I gather wood That's dead,—dried boughs, and underbrush that's been A long time on the ground, and drag it home.
Have you a wood-pile?
Nay.
I gather enough Each day for the day's need.
I have no time To gather more.
And does the dry wood burn As well as other wood?
Oh, better!
I see.
You would as lief, then, have this wood you gather, This dead wood, as a green tree freshly cut?
Ay, I would liefer have it, Majesty.
I need a fire quickly.
I have no time To wait for wood to season.
You may sit down, Is the Duke's agent here?
Ay, here.
What is it the Duke's custom to have done With this dead wood on his estate?
He burns it, Your Majesty.
You mean to say, I think, He pays a price to have it gathered and burned.
Ay, Majesty.
Where is it burned?
In a clearing.
And what is cooked upon it?
Nothing is cooked.
The Duke is not a gypsy.
 If he were, He would be shrewder, and not be paying money For what this woman is glad to do for naught.
Nothing is cooked, and nobody is warmed,— A most unthrifty fire!
Do you bid the Duke, Until he show me sounder cause for plaint, Permit this woman to gather unmolested Dead wood in his forest, and bear it home.—Lisa, Take care you break no half-green boughs.—The next case?
Is that of Mario, a miller, accused Of stealing grain.
A baker, by name Pietro, Brings this complaint against him, Majesty, Bianca of Lagoverde lies a-dying, And calls for you!
She calls for me?
Ay, Majesty.
You people, do you go now and live kindly Till I return.
I may not stay to judge you; Wherefore I set you free.
For I would rather A knave should go at large than that a just man Be punished.
If there be a knave among you, Let him live thoughtfully till I return.
Why, what is this, Enrico?
 Nay, it is not Enrico!
Nor is it Pablo!
How is this?
Nay, all new faces.
So!
Upon my word, And keep your fingers from me!—I see you there, Angelo!
Do not turn your head aside!
And you, Filippo!—Is the sick hand better I bound the bandage on?—Is't well enough To draw a sword against me?—Nay, I am sick.
I, that have loved you as your mothers love you— And you do this to me!
Lead me away.
Guido, is't you!
Ay, it is I, my Queen.
You sent for me, am I mistake not?
Ay.
Guido, you will not keep me when I tell you Snow-White is dying and calls my name!
I knew that.
You knew that, and you hold me here.
Oh, Heaven!
What are you?
I am a man.
You should have thought Of that before.
I could have been your friend If it had pleased you.
Failing that, I am Your enemy.
I am too aware of you, And have been ever, to hold me in at less.
Guido.
I beg of you upon my knees To let me go!
And why should I do that?
For pity's sake!
I do not know the word.
Then for the sake of my sworn hand and seal Upon a paper yielding fair to you This sovereignty you prize.
It is to me Little enough tonight.
I give it gladly.
You have no power to give what I have taken Already, and hold upon my hand, Rose-Red, Oh, do not call me that!
Oh, Guido, Guido, I cannot suffer further!
Let me go!
If only for a moment, let me go!
I will return,—I will but take her hand, And come away!
I swear it!
Let me go!
On one condition only.
Ay!
'Tis granted, Ere it is spoken!
That upon returning You come to me, and give yourself to me, To lie in my arms lovingly.
You hear?
To lie in my arms lovingly.
Oh, God!
It is my only word.
Oh, God!
Oh, God!
'Tis granted?
Nay,—I cannot!
I will die Instead.
Oh, God, to think that she will lie there And call for me, and I will never come!
Goodnight.
 Guido!
It shall be as you say.
Ah, Beatrice!
Nay, touch me not yet.
I will return.
Why,—'tis a simple matter!
I wonder now that even for a moment I held myself so dear!
When for her sake All things are little things!—This foolish body, This body is not I!
There is no I, Saving the need I have to go to her!
Tell us a story, mother!
Come away, now!
Tell us a story!
Do you go away with nurse A little while.
You will bring them back to me Later?
Ay, madam.
Later—not much later, I think.—Hear you no sound of horses yet, Giulietta, galloping this way?
Nay, not yet.
I will not go until she comes.
I will not.
Still,—if I should—Giulietta!
Ay, my mistress!
She will come, I tell you!
Ay, I doubt it not.
Ay, she will come.
But if she should come late, And I no longer be here to receive her, Show her all courtesy, I conjure you.
She will be weary, and mightily distraught.
Make her take wine,—and bring the children to her.
And tell her, they are hers now.
She is their mother.
And say to her—wait!—I have a message for her.
Say to her this, Giulietta: The foot stumbles, The hand hath its own awkward way; the tongue Moves foolishly in the mouth; but in the heart The truth lies,—and all's well 'twixt her and me.
Can you remember that?
Ay, madam, I think so.
If not the words, at least the gist of it.
Forget it all, my good child, but forget not: All's well 'twixt her and me.
Nay, that I have.
I will sleep now a little.
Do you leave me.
But go not far.
 I hear the sound of hoof-beats!
Nay, madam.
Ay, I tell you!
I can hear them!
My face upon the pillow brings my ear Nearer the ground!
She is coming!
Open the door!
Nay, it is so!
I hear it now myself!
Ay, there's a horse upon the bridge!
She's coming!
Stand back!
Stand out of the doorway!
 Majesty, The Queen is here.
Ay, ay!
Stand out of the doorway!
 She is here!
She is in the court!
She has leapt from horse!
Madam, Oh, God be praised!
This way!
Sister!
Snow-White!
Oh, no!
Oh, no!
Snow-White!
Ah-h!
Help me!
She is dying!
Mother, wake up!
Come out of doors!
Take them away.
Snow-White!
 Nay, it is over, Madam.
Leave me.
Leave me alone with her.
In sooth, I do not feel the earth so firm Under my feet as yesterday it was.
All that I loved are gone to a far land, And left me here alone, save for two children And twenty thousand enemies, and the thing Of horror that's in store for me.
Almost I feel my feet uprooted from the earth, There's such a tugging at me to be gone.
Save for your children,  'twould be simple enough To lay me down beside you in your bed, And call on Death, who is not yet out of hearing, To take me, too.
 Mistress I have news for you.
Guido is dead!
Is dead?
Ay, he is dead, Dead of a dagger i' the back,—and dead enough For twenty.
Scarce were you gone an hour's time We came upon him cold.
And in a pool Nearby, the Lady Francesca floating drowned, Who last was seen a-listening like a ghost At the door of the dungeon, 'Tis a marvelous thing!
But that's not all!
Why, what more can there be?
Mistress, in the night the people of Fiori Rose like a wind and swept the Duke's men down Like leaves!
Your throne is empty,—and awaits you!
Madam.
Ay, Giulietta.
Madam, last night, Before you came, she bade me tell you something, And not forget.
'Tis this: That the foot stumbles, The hand doth awkward things, and the foolish tongue Says what it would not say,—but in the heart Truth lies,—and all is well 'twixt her and you.
She bade me above all things to forget not The last: that all is well 'twixt her and you.
 She is not gone from me.
Oh, there be places Farther away than Death!
She is returned From her long silence, and rings out above me Like a silver bell!—Let us go back, Fidelio, And gather up the fallen stones, and build us Another tower.
